Saeid Abolfazli1, Zohreh Sanaei2, Abdullah Gani3, Muhammad Shiraz4

Mobile Cloud Computing Research Lab
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Email: abolfazli1, muh

arXiv:1206.6209v1 [cs.DC] 27 Jun 2012

utilized by an attacker in the absence of monitoring authority.
Hence, their usability is obstructed. Cloud infrastructure are
offering reliable pay-as-you-use services based on a service-
level agreement between service provider and consumer [5].
So, they are likely a better alternative to those free vulnerable
services.
Exploitation of cloud computing by mobile handhelds
breeds a new research domain called Mobile Cloud Computing
(MCC), which is the state-of-the-art computing paradigm com-
prised of three heterogeneous domains of mobile computing,
cloud computing, and networking [6]. Such non-uniformity
stems several challenges such as portability, interoperability,
and fragmentation that are deemed to be alleviated lever-
aging SOA [7] as a promising design philosophy embraced
by mobile computing and cloud computing communities to
stimulate portable, complex application using prefabricated
building blocks called Services. Services are prefabricated
codes that are developed in languages like Java, .Net, and PHP
and are often publicized in a publicly accessible repository
to be discovered and invoked by clients to provide speciﬁc
functionality. Currently, services are developed by skilled
developer(s) and hosted on a publicly available server on the
Web and recently on the Clouds. However, storing Services
on the Web and Cloud infrastructure not only increases long
WAN latency and decreases security due to the vulnerability of
the channel of Internet, but also squanders noticeable amount
of energy from the energy-constraint mobile devices.
To alleviate challenges of hosting and running services on
distant servers, nearby mobile devices like smartphones and
Tablets are likely an appropriate alternative if fundamental
requirements like security and reliability achieved. More than
86% of the world population are mobile subscriber and mo-
bile phone market share is rapidly increasing [8]. Although
their computing ability especially battery is very limited,
accumulative power of swarm of mobile devices can turn
them into a giant resource-rich, ubiquitous infrastructure to
not only provide a low-cost, green distributed computing, but
also generate an income source for their owners. Despite of
mobile phones’ ownership and maintenance cost including
subscription, trafﬁc, and energy fee mobile devices are hardly

Abstract—The vision of augmenting computing capabilities
of mobile devices, especially smartphones with least cost is
likely transforming to reality leveraging cloud computing. Cloud
exploitation by mobile devices breeds a new research domain
called Mobile Cloud Computing (MCC). However, issues like
portability and interoperability should be addressed for mobile
augmentation which is a non-trivial task using component-
based approaches. Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) is a
promising design philosophy embraced by mobile computing
and cloud computing communities to stimulate portable, complex
application using prefabricated building blocks called Services.
Utilizing distant cloud resources to host and run Services is
hampered by long WAN latency. Exploiting mobile devices in
vicinity alleviates long WAN latency, while creates new set of
issues like Service publishing and discovery as well as client-
server security, reliability, and Service availability. In this pa-
per, we propose a market-oriented architecture based on SOA
to stimulate publishing, discovering, and hosting Services on
nearby mobiles, which reduces long WAN latency and creates a
business opportunity that encourages mobile owners to embrace
Service hosting. Group of mobile phones simulate a nearby
cloud computing platform. We create new role of Service host
by enabling unskilled mobile owners/users to host Services
developed by skilled developers. Evidently, Service availability,
reliability, and Service-oriented mobile application portability
will increase towards green ubiquitous computing in our mobile
cloud infrastructure.

I. INTRODUCTION

Vision of performing computing-intensive tasks on the go
has been around since long and users are increasingly de-
manding rich interaction experience similar to (or even better
than) stationary computers. However, their resource poverty
beside their compact and light nature hinders users’ vision. Re-
searchers in academia and industry endeavour to augment mo-
bile devices in different ways which was studied in our prior
work [1]. We illustrated that mobile augmentation approaches
mainly require external resources such as nearby computing
devices [2], [3] or distant clouds servers[4]. Although nearby
computing devices likely offer lower latency, they are weak
devices that might not be able to perform complex resource-
intensive tasks. Moreover, their services are voluntary and free
that gives them freedom to terminate their services anytime.
These free computing machines can be an attacking point

III. SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE (SOA)

SOA is a design philosophy that follows ultimate aim of
reducing development time, cost, and complexity using pre-
fabricated building blocks called Services, while facilitates ap-
plication maintenance [13]. In this design philosophy, several
sequential or parallel Services are bind together to build a new
complex functionality. SOA has been utilized in computing
domains such as grid computing [14] or was cornerstone for
technologies such as cloud computing to alleviate several fun-
damental challenges such as portability, interoperability, and
integration of applications and software systems. This is due
to the fact that Services are autonomous and platform-neutral
meaning that different Services running on heterogeneous
platforms can still collaborate toward fulﬁlling a complex task.
Service are providing higher-level abstraction compared with
components which makes them suitable technology for large
scale computing domains such as MCC.
To alleviate several problems like portability and interop-
erability in MCC that are exacerbated by heterogeneity [6],
SOA is one of the best approaches by which online, platform-
neutral, interoperable mobile applications can be built and
ported to several mobile platforms with minimal modiﬁcation
and editing. A natural approach to leverage SOA in MCC is
to deploy computing Services in the cloud and invoke them
in runtime. However, this is impeded by several challenges
such as long WAN latency, security risks of utilizing the
wireless network as well as the channel of Internet, and energy
deﬁciency of mobile clients.
An alternative approach to utilize SOA in MCC is to deploy
Services on nearby mobile devices to be invoked with reduced
latency (utilizing alternative communication technologies such
as cellular networks and Wi-Fi can enhance performance)
without accessing the risky channel of Internet. Nevertheless,
there is no publicly acceptable incentive and motivation neither
for Service developer nor mobile hosts (except volunteers
who are willing to collaborate freely). Developers are re-
quired to build publicly available, reusable Services to be
utilized by other programmers in creating complex systems
and applications, while mobile owners are needed to lease
their computational resources such as CPU, memory, and most

II. RELATED WORKS

The concept of utilizing remote resources to augment com-
puting capabilities of mobile devices was ﬁrstly introduced by
Satyanarayana [2] in pervasive computing. The author visions
to host and run the resource-intensive components of the
mobile application on a nearby, powerful, stationary computer
called surrogates. However, surrogates provide free services
and can terminate their services anytime during runtime. They
also can violate security and privacy of mobile users in the
absence of supervising party. Migrating overhead in the mobile
side and virtualization delay in the surrogate side, hinder
success of cyber foraging [10]. Moreover for every execu-
tion, the code should be ofﬂoaded to surrogate machine that
increases the communication overhead and network latency.
The author and his colleagues later envisioned to utilize nearby
computers including mobile devices [3] to overcome the long
WAN latency while running the resource-intensive mobile
applications. However, security of surrogates and execution
latency demand further efforts.
In another effort [9] authors develop a lightweight Service
hosting toolkit for resource-poor mobile devices with ability
to migrate resource-intensive part(s) of the Services to a
remote resource-rich computing device. However, identifying
resource-intensive part(s) of a Service, allocating remote re-
sources, code ofﬂoading, and result collection prolong exe-
cution time and dissipate large amount of local resources.
To avoid such Service migration overhead, in our Market-
Oriented Mobile Cloud Computing (MOMCC) architecture,
we restrict mobile hosts to only host those Services that can be

C. Service Governor

Service governor is an entity located on a centralized server
responsible for monitoring and supervision tasks. Considering
huge number of Services, developers, hosts, and requesters
the need for a supervising and monitoring entity is vital
for the success of the whole system. Service governor is
the main governing entity in MOMCC with several crucial
responsibilities that are briefed as follows:
- Service Registry: Service registry acts as a public Service
repository similar to UDDI (Universal Description Discovery
Integration). Service registry maintains a local database called
’Service Database’ to store and retrieve available Service
descriptions, corresponding providers, and hosting entities. In
order to enhance security of both mobile host and service
consumer, the Service code is scrutinized against malicious
codes by the service registry. When a programmer develops a
Service, the Service should be registered with Service registry
to be exposed to future programmers. While registering a
Service as a business entity, Service developers state Service
functionality, input, output, binding method, security level,
and minimum required hardware or platform by exchanging
a SOAP (simple Object Access Protocol) message with the
Service registry. A part of a sample SOAP message to declare
minimum requirements is shown in Listing 1. From security
point of view, Services can be classiﬁed into various cate-
gories like low, medium, and high depends on the nature of
their functionality and engaging data. Service registry also is
responsible to check the service database to ﬁnd the requested
Service (using Service name or its description) and reply to
the requesters.

IV. MARKET-ORIENTED MOBILE CLOUD ARCHITECTURE

Figure 1a depicts our proposed layered architectural model
consists of four entities, namely Service developer, governor,
host, and requester/aggregator. The functional relationship
between these four building blocks are depicted in Figure
1b. Initially, the Service developer registers and publishes its
Service(s) to the Service governor which plays the role of
UDDI for Web Services. Service host communicates with
the Service governor to browse available Services and re-
quest for hosting. In runtime, the requester or aggregator
(program developer who aggregates services to quickly build
new composite applications) will query the required Service
against the Service governor to identify the nearby Service
host. Once found, the requester can directly invoke and bind
the Service. Service developer has also direct link with the
Service host to maintain and update the Service if required.
Service governor monitors the performance and reliability
of the Service host for future desicions. In this architecture
there is no direct communication between service requester
and developer. Anonymity of Service requester will likely
discourage attackers and likely protect privacy of hosts against
potential malicious Service developer.

A. Service Developer

Service developer is an organization or individual developer
responsible for design and development of the speciﬁc Service
offered to the requesters. Service developers are able to earn
money when their publicly deﬁned Services are available and
utilized by consumer. Service complexity varies from a small
mathematical function to a complex enterprise task. However,
Services should be lightweight building blocks executable
on resource-constrained mobile devices with least possible
footprint. In MOMCC, resource-intensive Services will be
broken down into small sub-Services to avoid runtime code
migration and ofﬂoading. However, invoking overhead is an
important factor while deﬁning Service granularity, because
invoking ﬁne grained Services imposes excessive processing
and communication overheads that prolongs overall execution
time leads to Service consumer’s resource drainage.

Listing 1: Service requirement speciﬁcation in a sample SOAP
message

<?xml version =” 1.0 ”
encoding =”UTF−8” ?>
. . .
<HostRequirments>
<P l at form>
<OS>Android</OS>
<MinVersion>3.2</ MinVersion>
</ P l at form>
<MinRequiredResources>
<CPU>512</CPU>
<Memory>2</ Memory>
<S t orage>5</ S t orage>
<Energy>500</ Energy>
</ MinRequiredResources>
</ HostRequirments>

B. Billing and Access Control

In this architecture, Service developing and hosting are paid
Services. Hence, billing and access control block is responsible
to control and audit service consumption, maintain billing
process, and negotiate among service developers, hosts, and
requesters to establish a mutual agreement similar to the
cloud Service-level agreement [5]. The negotiations happen
in various stages. Initially, Service provider can negotiate

- Service Proﬁler: Service proﬁler monitors the overall
functionality and performance of various Services. Service
provider is responsible to maintain the Service in case of any
malfunction. However, to enhance the quality of the Services,
their overall functionality, availability, and vulnerability is

(a) Layered Architecture of MOMCC
(b) The Block Diagram of MOMCC

Fig. 1: The Architecture of Market-Oriented Mobile Cloud Computing (MOMCC)

monitored by Service proﬁler to substitute low quality services
with more efﬁcient ones if required.
- Host Registry: Every host should communicate with the
public Service registry to browse available Services to be
hosted. The host must choose the Services with less resource
requirement than its available resources. For example, a ser-
vice with 2 MB memory need cannot be hosted on a device
with 1 MB memory. The host registry is responsible to validate
host demands and refuse inappropriate allocation requests.
Once the host allocation request is validated, the Service reg-
istry will communicate with the Security governor to evaluate
host’s Security Certiﬁcate (SC). The equal or higher SC can
be considered acceptable which means, a medium-sensitivity
Service can be executed either on a medium or high secure
host. For every host, all hosting Services are recorded in the
host database and will be utilized to address Service requests.
- Host Proﬁler: Upon registration of a mobile device as host,
the code will be accessible to the device to be hosted locally.
For every Service request, the binding procedure is undertaken
and Service can be invoked by the mobile Service consumer.
The history of Services hosted in every mobile host, including
its overall performance, availability, reliability, and security
will be collected (using a received execution report after each
attempt) and stored in a host database to be utilized for
periodic efﬁciency assessment of each host. The host database
is the shared data storage between host registry, proﬁler, and
security governor.
- Security Governor Security is one of the most important
concerns among Service consumers, especially in the wireless
domain. In this architecture, mobile hosts receives a SC upon
successful registry. The trust between security governor and
mobile host can be achieved in various ways like reputation
trust or identity trust. According to the reputation trust [15],
a nascent mobile host will be issued the lowest security trust
to host low-sensitive Services only due to lack of reputation
and prior experience. For every Service execution, the overall
behaviour of the host will be monitored and captured by
the host proﬁler, which will be used to promote or demote

host’s SC. The Service consumer also can rate the quality
of Service, which would be an incentive for good hosting.
The better and longer execution history, the higher degree
of trust. However, this model is subject to sudden change in
device/owner’s behaviour and might lead to security violation
in the absence of solid identity of the host. An alternative
trust model can be based on the identity of device holder in the
presence of an authentication system. At the time of registering
for a Service, the device owner’s identity will be veriﬁed to
discourage possible security attack and a set of credential will
be issued. For cellular clients such as smartphones, the SIM
card detail can be exploited as an identity and authentication
token [16].

D. Mobile Service Host

A mobile host is a mobile device like smartphone or Tablet
which is able and desired to host the implemented Service
code and execute it for Service requester on demand. The host
activity is a trade-off between resource and money. In order
to host a Service, a mobile device must communicate with the
Service Governor to ﬁnd the appropriate Services according
to its computing abilities and beneﬁts. In this architecture,
Service hosting is a paid Service, hence, Service governor
should negotiate with developer (if wishes to provide paid
Services), requester, and host to agree on a certain revenue
percentage. In generic SOA, Service provider implements or
purchase Service implementation, supply its description, and
provide technical and business maintenance [17]. However,
due to lack of mobile owners/users’ technical competency, we
argue that majority of technical and business maintenance of
the Services should be accomplished by the Service provider.
Every functional and non-functional failure should be reported
to the Service provider for escalation.
Beside ﬁnacial beneﬁts of hosting a Service, mobile device
will become voulnerable to attack and privacy violation. To
avoid such threats, certain mechanisms such as Sandboxing
and Service signing (signing Service code by the service
governor) can be deployed.

The ultimate aim of SOA is to reduce development time,
cost, and complexity using prefabricated building blocked
called Services, while facilitates application maintenance. In
this design philosophy, several sequential or parallel prefab-
ricated Services are bound together to provide a new com-
plex functionality. Service requester can be the mobile end-
consumers of paid Services (there might be some free Services
as well) that augments its device processing abilities, Service
aggregator. Service aggregator is a Service requester that hosts
another Service. Figure 2 depicts relationship between Service
requester, aggregator, and provider.
Software
Engineering
Enforcement:The
service
governor
might enforce software engineering principals to increase
reusability, portability, and interoperability while assuring re-
source efﬁciency of Services for mobile host. Due to resource
limitation of mobile devices, Services should be developed
with minimum footprint to consume fewer resources from the
hosting devices. Excessive resource consumption by a weakly-
designed Service causes extra cost and ultimately will be
removed from the popular Service stack.
Law Enforcement: In near future, governments’ rules and
regulation such as tax and insurance policies as well as QoS
metrics are expected to be enforced on Service developers and
hosts, which can be performed by Service governor.

Fig. 2: The role of Service Aggregator

B. Disadvantages
• Host Computing Limitation: One of the drawbacks of
MOMCC architecture is that complexity of Services is highly
dependent on computing capabilities of hosting devices which
are not very high. Heavy enterprise applications might found
MOMMC difﬁcult to utilize. In our future work, we will
utilize resource-rich stationary devices to serve enterprise and
resource-intensive applications.
• Fine granularity of Services: Due to limitation of host,
Services are often ﬁne in granularity which causes extra
execution overhead on mobile hosts. Such overhead prolongs
execution time and increases communication trafﬁc as well
which will be investigated in our future work.
• Unusable in Remote Area: This architecture is highly
dependent on nearby computing devices and will be affected
in the remote environment such as mountain or jungles where
less mobile devices exist.
• No Ofﬂine Usability Applications built on MOMCC
architecture, like other Service-based software, are highly
dependent on networking and communication with external
devices. Application will not be useful in ofﬂine mode.

A scenario is illustrated in Figure 3. A ’host’ requests a list
of available Services to decide the best available option(s) in
terms of resource consumption and ﬁnancial beneﬁts. A list
of available Services will be sent back to the ’host’ as a reply.
Upon deciding a particular Service, ’host’ sends a message to
the ’host registry’ to request hosting of the Service. In order
to conﬁrm the ’host’ request, the ’host registry’ component
should verify security level of Service and the SC of the ’host’.
Hence, the ’host registry’ sends a request to the ’security
governor’ for the SC of the corresponding ’host.’ The ’security
governor’ checks the ’host database’ and forwards the SC of
the ’host’ to the ’host registry.’ If there is no available SC
for the ’host’, the ’security governor’ contacts the ’host’ to
establish a trust and issue the SC. Once the SC is issued and
passed to the ’host registry’, the Service is allocated to the
’host’ and a conﬁrmation message forwarded to the ’host’.

V. ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGES

In this section we describe beneﬁts and limitation of our
MOMCC architecture.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we employ SOA and propose a Market-
Oriented architecture for mobile cloud computing which is the

A. Advantages

• Increased Resource Availability: By leveraging large
number of nearby mobile devices in public places like shop-

Fig. 3: The Collaborative Scenario among Major Entities

ﬁrst of its own to the best of our knowledge. This architecture
consists of four major entities, namely Service developer,
host, governor, and requester. Service developer and host are
clearly detached from each other to not only facilitate and
encourage Service hosting by unskilled mobile users, but
also to increase privacy of the Service requester (consumers).
A cloud of mobile devices including smartphones, Tablets,
and sundry mobile devices is created where devices with
heterogeneous platforms, hardware, and manufacturers can co-
exist and collaborate. We encourage Service development and
hosting by providing monetary incentive for programmers and
mobile owners to stimulate mobile Service hosting. Based on
Service governor responsibilities we argue that mobile network
operators are likely the best candidate to serve as the Service
governor, because they are centralized, well-established, and
reputed organizations that have been serving mobile users
since long and could establish high degree of trust with users.
Successful mobile Service hosting architecture can be utilized
in various domains such as supply chain management in which
various organizations (e.g. billing and transport) can collabo-
rate to perform a business activity. A Service hosted on a
driver’s mobile can notify customer orders and update delivery
scheduling to the recipient. However, MOMCC architecture
is more suitable for computing-intensive tasks since different
hosts share their computational resources. Data-intensive tasks
are less likely addressable in this architecture.
In our future work, we will implement the proposed
MOMCC architecture and accommodate data-intensive and
complex enterprise applications by employing resourceful
computing devices in near and far distance. Utilizing certiﬁed
surrogate machines (by security governor) and Cloud infras-
tructures will enable Service developer to build computational-
and data-intensive applications.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Abolfazli, Z. Sanaei, and A. Gani, “Mobile cloud computing: A
review on smartphone augmentation approaches,” in Proc. CISCO, 2012.
[2] M. Satyanarayanan, “Pervasive computing: vision and challenges,” Per-
sonal Communications, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 10–17, 2001.
[3] M. Satyanarayanan, P. Bahl, R. Caceres, and N. Davies, “The case for
vm-based cloudlets in mobile computing,” Pervasive Computing, vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 14–23, 2009.
[4] X. W. Zhang, A. Kunjithapatham, S. Jeong, and S. Gibbs, “Towards an
elastic application model for augmenting the computing capabilities of
mobile devices with cloud computing,” Mobile Networks & Applications,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 270–284, 2011.
[5] R. Buyya, C. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, “Cloud
computing and emerging it platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for
delivering computing as the 5th utility,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 599–616, 2009.
[6] Z. Sanaei, S. Abolfazli, A. Gani, and R. H. Khokhar, “Tripod of
requirements in horizontal heterogeneous mobile cloud computing,” in
Proc. CISCO, 2012.
[7] T. Erl, Service-oriented architecture: concepts, technology, and design.
Prentice Hall PTR, 2005.
[8] Gartner. (2012, Feb) Worldwide smartphone sales soared in fourth
quarter of 2011 with 47 percent growth. Gartner. [Online]. Available:

[9] M. Asif, S. Majumdar, and R. Dragnea, “Hosting web services on
resource constrained devices,” in Proc. ICWS, July 2007, pp. 583–590.
[10] M. Shariﬁ, S. Kafaie, and O. Kasheﬁ, “A survey and taxonomy of
cyber foraging of mobile devices,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
IEEE, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–12, 2011.
[11] E. Marinelli, “Hyrax: cloud computing on mobile devices using mapre-
duce,” Master Thesis, Computer Science Deptartment, CMU, 2009.
[12] G. Huerta-Canepa and D. Lee, “A virtual cloud computing provider for
mobile devices,” in Proc. MCS.
ACM, 2010, pp. 6:1–6:5.
[13] M. Papazoglou and W. Van Den Heuvel, “Service oriented architectures:
approaches, technologies and research issues,” The VLDB journal,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 389–415, 2007.
[14] L. Srinivasan and J. Treadwell, “An overview of service-oriented archi-
tecture, web services and grid computing,” HP Software Global Business
Unit, vol. 2, 2005.
[15] A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and reputation
systems for online service provision,” Decision support systems, vol. 43,
no. 2, pp. 618–644, 2007.
[16] C. Rust, S. Salsano, and L. Schnake, “The sim card as an enabler for
security, privacy, and trust in mobile services,” in Proceedings of the
conference on ICT-MobileSummit, 2008.
[17] M. Papazoglou and D. Georgakopoulos, “Service-oriented computing,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 25–28, 2003.
[18] G. P. Perrucci, F. H. P. Fitzek, and J. Widmer, “Survey on energy
consumption entities on the smartphone platform,” in Proc. VTC Spring,
2011, pp. 1–6.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is funded by the Malaysian Ministry of Higher
Education under the University of Malaya High Impact Re-
search Grant UM.C/HIR/MOHE/FCSIT/03.