Architectural Consistency Checking in Plugin-Based
Software Systems

Timo Greifenberg
Software Engineering
RWTH Aachen University

Klaus Müller
Software Engineering
RWTH Aachen University

Bernhard Rumpe
Software Engineering
RWTH Aachen University

ABSTRACT

at all, the architectural descriptions are seldom maintained
[9]. This stems from the fact that manually ensuring that the
software architecture stays consistent with the implemen-
tation of a software system is a laborious and error-prone
task.
This deviation of architecture and implementation,
known as architecture erosion [12], negatively impacts soft-
ware quality, maintainability and evolvability [9, 16, 8].
To cope with this problem, a variety of approaches have
been developed, allowing to check this consistency automat-
ically [9, 11, 2]. These approaches do, for instance, provide
means to deﬁne architectural rules that have to be fulﬁlled
or that must not be violated by the implementation. Other
approaches are based on a deﬁnition of the expected archi-
tecture and an extraction of the existing architecture [10,
3]. If a deviation is detected, developers are informed about
these.
However, these approaches mainly focus on (ﬁne-
grained) dependencies between source code entities such as
classes and do not allow to easily deﬁne more abstract con-
straints concerning dependencies between plugins. Express-
ing comparable constraints with the existing approaches is
possible to a certain extent, but more laborious and less con-
venient for a system architect having to deﬁne constraints
for plugin dependencies. In particular, this paper assumes
that the plugin-based software system whose consistency is
checked was developed with Eclipse [6] and, thus, consists
of Eclipse plugins and Eclipse features.
Despite this, our
approach is transferable to plugin-based systems developed
with another tooling infrastructure as long as dependencies
between plugins and groups of plugins can be identiﬁed.
This paper proposes a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL),
called Dependency Constraint Language (DepCoL), for deﬁn-
ing constraints concerning plugin and feature dependencies
in a plugin-based software system. By providing an easy to
use and convenient DSL for software architects of plugin-
based software systems, we assume that there is a higher
chance that the approach is accepted and permanently in-
tegrated into the development process. Using DepCoL, it is
possible to deﬁne constraints for single elements as well as
groups of elements, to reduce the speciﬁcation eﬀort. To pro-
cess constraints modeled in DepCoL, an Eclipse plugin was
developed which can be integrated into the development en-
vironment of the plugin-based software system. This plugin
is capable to check the consistency between the implemen-
tation of the system under development and the modeled
constraints automatically. These checks can be performed
accompanying the development of the software system. If
a developer introduces a dependency which is forbidden ac-
cording to the constraint speciﬁcations, this violation is di-

Manually ensuring that the implementation of a software
system is consistent with the software architecture is a la-
borious and error-prone task. Thus, a variety of approaches
towards automated consistency checking have been devel-
oped to counteract architecture erosion. However, these ap-
proaches lack means to deﬁne and check architectural re-
strictions concerning plugin dependencies, which is required
for plugin-based software systems.
In this paper, we propose a domain-speciﬁc language called
Dependency Constraint Language (DepCoL) to facilitate the
deﬁnition of constraints concerning plugin dependencies. Us-
ing DepCoL, it is possible to deﬁne constraints aﬀecting
groups of plugins, reducing the required speciﬁcation eﬀort,
to formulate constraints for speciﬁc plugins only and to re-
ﬁne constraints.
Moreover, we provide an Eclipse plugin,
which checks whether the software system under develop-
ment is consistent with the modeled constraints. This en-
ables a seamless integration into the development process to
eﬀortless check consistency during development of the soft-
ware system.
In this way, developers are informed about
dependency violations immediately and this supports devel-
opers in counteracting architecture erosion.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

D.2 [Software Engineering]: Software Architectures

Keywords

Architectural consistency, dependency constraint language

1.
INTRODUCTION
The software architecture of a software system deﬁnes the
structuring of a software system into components and how
these components are expected to interact [12, 7]. Further-
more, the software architecture deﬁnes design decisions that
are crucial for understanding a software system [15]. How-
ever, if the architecture of a software system is documented

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from
ECSAW ’15, September 07 - 11, 2015, Dubrovnik/Cavtat, Croatia

c⃝2015 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-3393-1/15/09...$15.00

DOI:

2.
BACKGROUND
To avoid misunderstandings, relevant term deﬁnitions are
introduced ﬁrst. As DepCoL was developed in a cooperation
project with an industrial partner, the application context
of this work is brieﬂy described afterwards.

2.1
Term deﬁnitions
This paper focuses on plugin-based software systems de-
veloped in Eclipse. Due to this, it is concerned about de-
pendencies between Eclipse plugins and Eclipse features. In
the further course of this paper Eclipse plugin will be ab-
breviated as plugin and Eclipse feature as feature.
The smallest component of a plugin-based system that is
considered in this work is a plugin. In simple terms, a plu-
gin is a collection of classes and libraries required by these
classes. Multiple plugins can be grouped in a feature. In
Eclipse, a feature can also contain other features but to sim-
plify the description, it is assumed in the following that fea-
tures merely contain plugins. In addition, this approach uses
the term feature group to refer to a logical group of features.
The user is free to deﬁne which features should be contained
in such a feature group. Analogous to that, a plugin group
represents a logical group of plugins.
Based on these deﬁnitions, both features and plugin groups
are composed of plugins. The diﬀerence between both terms
is that a feature is an essential part of the plugin-based soft-
ware system itself, whereas a plugin group is only deﬁned in
the dependency model to group selected plugins. To be able
to distinguish between these two kinds of plugin groups on
the level of the dependency model, diﬀerent terms are used
in this work.
Each plugin might depend on a multitude of other plugins
in order to work properly. This means that the plugin can
only be executed, if these plugins are also available. Conse-
quently, there are (indirect) dependencies between plugins
and features, between features and features and so forth.
The term dependency is concretized in the following.
A plugin ”m” depends on a plugin ”n” if ”n” is listed as
a required bundle in the Eclipse manifest ﬁle of ”m”. All
other dependencies referred to in this work are based on
this dependency deﬁnition. Before this is explained in more
detail, please note that, in the end, a plugin, a feature, a
plugin group and a feature group can all be represented as
a group of plugins. For a feature and a plugin group this
is obvious. A single plugin can be represented by a plugin
group containing only the single plugin. For a feature group,
the resulting group of plugins can be derived by collecting
the plugins of all features contained in the feature group.
Let X and Y represent a plugin, a feature, a plugin group
or a feature group and let PG be a function which returns
the group of plugins for the passed argument.
Then, X
depends on Y if there is a plugin m ∈PG(X) and a plugin
n ∈PG(Y ) such that plugin ”m” depends on plugin ”n”.

3.
OVERVIEW
The key idea that underlies the presented approach is that
there is an explicit dependency model which contains con-
straints concerning dependencies between plugins and fea-
tures of a plugin-based software system.
The consistency
between the implementation of a software system and the
dependency model can be checked automatically. Figure 1
gives an overview of the basic workﬂow which is established
through the presented approach.

define

System architect

Dependency model

checks

informs about violations

Dependency
checker

analyze all
1
2

waits for changes

changes/creates

Manifest file

Developer

Figure 1:
Overview of architecture consistency
checking process

At the beginning, the system architects have to deﬁne a
dependency model using DepCoL. This dependency model
encapsulates the architectural rules that must not be vio-
lated by the analyzed plugin-based software system.
The dependency checker that is responsible for automat-
ically checking the architectural consistency needs to be in-
tegrated into the development environment in which the
plugin-based software system to be checked is developed.
Then, the dependency checker can automatically check for
violations of that software system against the given depen-
dency model. For this purpose, at ﬁrst the existing depen-
dencies between the plugins of the plugin-based software sys-
tem are extracted.
As this work focuses on plugin-based
systems which are developed with Eclipse, the extraction of
the existing dependencies is carried out by analyzing Eclipse
manifest ﬁles. The dependency checker either extracts all

Figure 2: Eclipse view showing results of dependency checker

1 declare
featurebase {

dependencies from the Eclipse manifest ﬁles belonging to
the corresponding plugin-based software system or it is trig-
gered to extract the dependencies of one speciﬁc plugin (and
the associated feature) only. The latter case is performed
in case the dependency checker was informed that the de-
pendencies of one particular plugin have been changed. In
this situation, the dependency checker only needs to check
whether the changed plugin violates the dependency model
and, hence, only the dependencies of this changed plugin
need to be obtained.
No matter in which way the invocation of the dependency
checker is initiated, the developers are informed immediately
about violations against the dependency model through an
Eclipse view as shown in Figure 2. In this view, the violation
messages are grouped by the severity of the violation. If a
dependency to a feature is detected as forbidden or tolerated,
the view also indicates the dependencies to which plugins of
that feature cause the violation.
In addition to that, the
manifest ﬁles of the plugins violating the dependency model
are annotated with an error marker. This instant feedback
allows for directly resolving the undesired dependencies and
thus directly counteracts architecture erosion.

2
f1;

3
f2;

4
f3;

5 }

Listing 1: Feature base example

4.1
Deﬁnition of structures referring to fea-
tures and plugins

4.1.1
Feature and plugin base
A dependency model usually refers to a variety of feature
and plugin names. To avoid that feature or plugin names
are written in diﬀerent ways in the dependency model, the
concept of a feature base and plugin base was introduced.
A feature base contains the names of all features which can
be directly referenced in the dependency model. A context
condition ensures that only feature names which are listed
in the feature base can be named in the dependency model.
Listing 1 shows an example for a feature base speciﬁcation,
through which it is declared that the features ”f1”, ”f2” and
”f3” can be used in the dependency model.
Analogous to that, all plugin names which can be refer-
enced have to be declared in a plugin base. Once again, this
is ensured by a context condition. In order to support the
developers, the provided Eclipse tooling can generate fea-
ture and plugin bases which contain all feature and plugin
names from a particular workspace.

4.
THE DEPENDENCY CONSTRAINT LAN-
GUAGE DEPCOL
In this section, the dependency constraint language Dep-
CoL is presented. DepCoL provides two kinds of language
constructs in order to deﬁne a dependency model: those al-
lowing to deﬁne structures that refer to plugins or features
and those that make it possible to formulate constraints con-
cerning dependencies between plugins, features and the pre-
viously deﬁned structures.
An example for the deﬁnition
of a structure referring to features is a feature group.
In
its deﬁnition, the user has to state which features belong
to the feature group. Listing 2 on the next page shows a
concrete example for feature group deﬁnitions. As soon as
the user introduced a structure such as a feature group, con-
crete constraints can be declared for the elements contained
in the structure. For instance, it could be formulated that
all features from one feature group must not depend on all
features from an other feature group.
In the following, at ﬁrst the diﬀerent language constructs
of DepCoL are presented in more detail. A self-contained
but ﬁctive example for a dependency model can be found
at [5]. After that, the semantics of a dependency model is
brieﬂy described. Finally, the implementation of the depen-
dency checker is sketched.

4.1.2
Feature and plugin group
To simplify the speciﬁcation of constraints for multiple
features and plugins, DepCoL supports feature and plugin
groups. A feature group can contain a list of feature names
that are deﬁned in the feature base. In addition to that,
a feature group can contain regular expressions for feature
names. Within a regular expression, it is possible to make
use of the wildcard ”*” which represents an arbitrary string.
Finally, a feature group can contain other feature groups. In
summary, this means that a feature ”f” is contained in a fea-
ture group ”fg” if one of the following conditions is fulﬁlled:

• feature ”f” is explicitly listed in the feature group ”fg”.

• feature ”f” matches a regular expression contained in
the feature group ”fg”.

• feature ”f” is contained in a feature group ”subfg” that
is contained in ”fg”.

3
f2;

3
[warning] forbid
dependency
to
featuregroup

4 }

4
fg2;

5 declare
featuregroup
fgRegExp {

5 }

6
fs.ui .*;

6 featuregroup
fgListFeatures {

7
fs.core .*;

7
tolerate
dependency
to
featuregroup

8 }

8
fgRegExp;

9 declare
featuregroup
fgCombined {

9 }

10
f3;

11
fs.ext .*;

Listing
3:
Examples
for
forbidding/tolerating
dependencies

12
featuregroup
fgListFeatures ;

13
featuregroup
fgRegExp;

14 }

pendency is not desired but also not (yet) forbidden, tem-
porarily allowed but potentially forbidden in future or in
case a dependency modeler is unsure about whether the de-
pendency should be allowed or forbidden. By default, the
user receives a warning message if a dependency is detected
by the dependency checker that is deﬁned as tolerated. In
contrast to this, an error message is reported if a forbid-
den dependency is detected. For forbidden dependencies, it
is possible to denote a severity on how critical a violation
against the speciﬁcation is. This severity embodies how im-
portant it is to ﬁx a violation. Possible severity types are:
critical, error and warning. In the reporting of the violation
messages, the messages are diﬀerentiated according to their
severity type, as shown in Figure 2.
Please note that, for the dependency checker, forbidden
dependencies with severity warning and tolerated dependen-
cies are treated equally, as both result in warning messages.
However, for a dependency modeler, there is a diﬀerence be-
tween both. A forbidden dependency with severity warning
is really forbidden, but a violation is not critical and it is suf-
ﬁcient to report a warning. A tolerated dependency instead
usually expresses, that the dependency is not desired and
that it needs to be clariﬁed how to handle the dependency.
Listing 3 shows examples for concrete dependency con-
straints. These indicate that dependencies from plugin ”p1”
to feature ”f2” and to all features contained in feature group
”fg2” are forbidden. Violations against the ﬁrst constraint
are regarded as critical, whereas violations against the sec-
ond constraint are regarded as warnings.
Moreover, List-
ing 3 indicates that dependencies from features contained
in feature group ”fgListFeatures” to features contained in
feature group ”fgRegExp” are only tolerated.
An important property of DepCoL is that constraints can
reﬁne previously deﬁned constraints for speciﬁc features,
plugins, feature groups and plugin groups. In this way, it
can, e.g., be expressed that all plugins in a plugin group
must not depend on speciﬁc plugins and after that, it can
be reﬁned that selected plugins are allowed to depend on
speciﬁc other plugins. The reﬁnement concept is explained
in more detail in the next subsections.

Listing
2:
Diﬀerent
variants
for
feature
group
speciﬁcations

Please note that, as each feature name listed explicitly in
a feature group can be regarded as a simple regular expres-
sion and a feature group can contain further regular expres-
sions, each feature group can in the end be represented as
one regular expression which potentially consists of multi-
ple alternatives and which represents a subset of features.
Analogous to that, each plugin group can be represented as
one regular expression.
Examples for feature group speciﬁcations are given in List-
ing 2. In this example, the feature group ”fgListFeatures”
only contains the features ”f1” and ”f2”. The feature group
”fgRegExp” refers to all features with names that start with
”fs.ui.” or with ”fs.core.”.
Finally, feature group ”fgCom-
bined” illustrates how diﬀerent notations can be combined.
The feature group contains the features from the previously
described feature groups and in addition, feature ”f3” as well
as all features with names that start with ”fs.ext.”.
Analogous to the feature group speciﬁcation, a plugin
group can comprise multiple explicitly stated plugin names,
regular expressions for plugins and other plugin groups. Fea-
ture and plugin groups do not have to be disjunct, i.e., a
feature can be contained in multiple feature groups and a
plugin can be contained in multiple plugin groups.
Amongst others, feature and plugin groups can be used to
represent layered software architectures [1]. For each layer,
a feature or plugin group can be created which comprises the
features or plugins which are contained in the corresponding
layer. Moreover, constraints can be deﬁned for each feature
or plugin group to restrict the dependencies between the
layers. The deﬁnition of constraints will be explained in the
next subsection.

4.2
Deﬁnition of dependency constraints
Constraints can be formulated for all features included in
the feature base and all plugins named in the plugin base.
Furthermore, constraints can be stated for all feature groups
and plugin groups.
For each of these elements, it can be
deﬁned whether dependencies to speciﬁc features, plugins,
feature groups or plugin groups are forbidden, tolerated or
allowed. By default, dependencies between all elements are
allowed. Due to this, it is necessary to deﬁne forbidden and
tolerated dependencies explicitly.
Nevertheless, it can be
required to explicitly allow a dependency, which is explained
in more detail later in this subsection. This default behavior
can also be adapted if desired.
Tolerated dependencies can be used to indicate that a de-

4.3
Semantics of a dependency model
As explained in Subsection 2.1, a plugin, a feature, a plu-
gin group and a feature group can all be represented as a
group of plugins in the end. Let X and Y refer to a plu-
gin, a feature, a plugin group or a feature group and let
the function PG return the group of plugins represented by
the passed argument. Then, a constraint between X and
Y can be represented as a set of pairs of plugins (xi, yi) for
all xi ∈PG(X) and yi ∈PG(Y ). Each constraint in the
dependency model can be described by such pairs of plugins.

4.4
Dependency constraint checker implemen-
tation
In this section, the implementation of the dependency
checker is outlined and illustrated by a concrete example.
It is assumed that it is checked whether the dependencies
of a particular plugin and the feature containing that plugin
violate a given dependency model. The case that the depen-
dencies of all plugins are validated is handled by performing
these steps for each plugin.

4.4.1
Implementation
As a ﬁrst step in the dependency checking phase, the
dependency checker extracts the existing dependencies be-
tween the plugins that are part of the analyzed software
system. This extraction is only performed if the plugin de-
pendencies have not been extracted before or the plugin de-
pendencies have changed since the last extraction.
The most important aspect that has to be considered in
the dependency checker is that constraints can be reﬁned by
constraints that are deﬁned later in the dependency model.
To cope with this, the dependency model is processed from
end to beginning and each structure in which constraints
are deﬁned is traversed from end to beginning too. In this
traversal of the dependency model, a dependency is only
considered, if it has not been addressed by a previously pro-
cessed constraint, as will be explained in more detail subse-
quently. Moreover, only those constraints are treated that
concern the validated plugin or the feature containing the
validated plugin.
While processing the relevant constraints, the dependency
checker builds up relations for the pairs of plugins between
which dependencies are allowed or between which depen-
dencies are regarded as critical, as errors or as warnings
according to the dependency model.
These four relations
are named Rallowed, Rcritical, Rerror and Rwarning in the
following and realize the mapping from the pairs of plug-

4.4.2
Example
The processing of the dependency model given in List-
ing 4 is sketched in the following.
In this example, it is
assumed that the plugin base, denoted in the following by
PB, contains the plugins ”p1”, ”p2”, ”p3”, ”p4.ui”, ”p5.ui”
and ”p6.i18n”. Moreover, it is assumed that plugin group
”pg1” contains at least the plugin ”p1”, that plugin group

3
tolerate
dependency
to
plugingroup
pgUi;

4 }

5 plugin p1 {

6
allow
dependency
to plugin p4.ui;

7 }

Listing 4: Example for plugin reﬁning plugin group
constraints

”pgUi”contains all plugins with names ending with ”.ui”and
that plugin group ”ALL” contains all plugins. Finally, it is
assumed that plugin ”p1” is validated and that ”p1” requires
the plugins ”p4.ui”, ”p5.ui” and ”p6.i18n”.
As plugin ”p1” is validated, only constraints for this plu-
gin are processed. Due to the constraint in line 6, the pair
(p1, p4.ui) is added to Rallowed. In the next step, the con-
straints for plugin group ”pg1” would be processed, starting
with the constraint in line 3. Based on this constraint, it
would be checked whether the pairs (p1, p4.ui) and (p1, p5.ui)
can be added to Rwarning.
As Rallowed already contains
(p1, p4.ui), only (p1, p5.ui) is added to Rwarning. Finally,
the pairs (p1, px) with px ∈PB are added to Rerror, pro-
vided that px represents a required plugin and R does not
already contain the corresponding pair.
Therefore, only
(p1, p6.i18n) is added. As a result, a warning message would
be reported for the tolerated dependency from ”p1”to ”p5.ui”
and an error message would be reported for the dependency
between ”p1” and ”p6.i18n”.

5.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss related work in the context
of static architecture consistency checking. The most im-
portant diﬀerence between our work and the existing ap-
proaches is that our work focuses on plugin-based software
systems. In contrast to this, most existing approaches ad-
dress dependencies on the source code level.
In [14, 15], dependencies within a software system are re-
stricted using the static, declarative language DCL. DCL
provides means to deﬁne constraints between modules, which
represent sets of classes. In order to specify which classes
belong to a module, the classes can either be listed by de-
noting their fully qualiﬁed names or by using regular ex-
pressions which can match multiple classes. Based on these
models, several constraints can be deﬁned, e.g., that only
classes from module A can access classes from module B.
The deﬁnition of modules in [14, 15] is comparable to the
deﬁnition of feature and plugin groups.
In [10], the software reﬂexion model technique is intro-
duced. In this technique, developers have to deﬁne a high
level model which contains entities and relations between
these entities. Moreover, developers have to extract a source
model such as a call graph from the source code and at the
end, a mapping between the high-level model and the source
model has to be performed. In the mapping phase, entities
from the high-level model have to be assigned to elements of
the source model, typically using regular expressions. Based
on these models and the mapping, a software reﬂexion model
is computed to determine where the high-level model does
(not) comply with the source model. In contrast to reﬂex-
ion models, in our work developers do not have to provide
a high-level model and a mapping to the source model. In-

6.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed the DSL DepCoL to deﬁne
constraints concerning plugin and feature dependencies in a
plugin-based software system.
With DepCoL, constraints
can be speciﬁed on diﬀerent levels of granularity, e.g., for
feature and plugin groups but also for speciﬁc features and
plugins. One speciality of DepCoL is that it supports the
reﬁning of constraints. This facilitates deﬁning some gen-
eral constraints ﬁrst which can then be reﬁned for speciﬁc
elements, if required.
By integrating a dependency checker into the development
environment in which the plugin-based software system is
implemented, developers can be informed immediately in
case the changes they performed violate the previously de-
ﬁned constraints. In this way, DepCoL and the according
tooling counteract architectural erosion in plugin-based soft-
ware systems. This approach is mainly feasible for complex
plugin-based software systems with a multitude of plugins.
In such systems it is not possible to keep track of the depen-
dencies between plugins and features manually.
For future work, we plan to conduct a long-term case
study in the industrial cooperation project. In the course of
this, we particularly plan to investigate whether the reﬁne-
ment interpretation we are using so far is suited for complex
plugin-based software systems or whether other information
should be used, e.g., the hierarchy of elements. Moreover,
we plan to analyze whether it would be advantageous to
consider transitive dependencies which are not considered
so far.

7.
REFERENCES

[1] F. Buschmann, R. Meunier, H. Rohnert,
P. Sommerlad, and M. Stal. Pattern-Oriented Software
Architecture: A System of Patterns. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1996.
[2] L. de Silva and D. Balasubramaniam. Controlling
software architecture erosion: A survey. Journal of
Systems and Software, 85(1):132–151, Jan. 2012.
[3] F. Deissenboeck, L. Heinemann, B. Hummel, and
E. Juergens. Flexible Architecture Conformance
Assessment with ConQAT. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Software Engineering,
ICSE ’10, pages 247–250, 2010.
[4] C. Deiters, P. Dohrmann, S. Herold, and A. Rausch.
Rule-Based Architectural Compliance Checks for
Enterprise Architecture Management. In Proceedings
of the International Enterprise Distributed Object