Classifying Options for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Kai Arulkumaran1, Nat Dilokthanakul2, Murray Shanahan2, and Anil Anthony Bharath1

1 Department of Bioengineering
2 Department of Computing
Imperial College London, London SW7 2BP, UK

arXiv:1604.08153v3 [cs.LG] 19 Jun 2017

Abstract

policy. The ability to use options gives the agent many ad-
vantages, such as temporally-extended exploration, allowing
planning across a range of time scales and the ability to trans-
fer knowledge to different tasks.
Another approach, MAXQ [Dietterich, 2000], decomposes
a task into a hierarchy of subtasks. This decomposition allows
MAXQ agents to improve performance towards achieving the
main objective by recursively solving smaller problems ﬁrst.
Both the options and MAXQ frameworks are constructed so
that prior domain knowledge can be implemented naturally.
Both approaches can be viewed as constructing a main policy
from smaller sub-policies with implemented prior knowledge
on either the structural constraints or the behaviour of the sub-
policies themselves.
We consider the class of problems where the task can be
broken down into reward-independent subtasks by a human
expert. The task decomposition is done such that the sub-
tasks share the same state space, but can be explicitly parti-
tioned (for different options). If the action space can similarly
be partitioned, then this knowledge can also be incorporated
to bound the actions available to each option policy. With
this domain knowledge we decompose the DQN into a com-
position of smaller representations, derived from prior work
on hierarchical reinforcement learning. Although there is ev-
idence that the DQN can implicitly learn options [Zahavy et
al., 2016], we investigate whether there is any beneﬁt to con-
structing options explicitly.

In this paper we combine one method for hi-
erarchical reinforcement learning—the options
framework—with
deep
Q-networks
(DQNs)
through the use of different “option heads” on the
policy network, and a supervisory network for
choosing between the different options. We utilise
our setup to investigate the effects of architectural
constraints in subtasks with positive and negative
transfer, across a range of network capacities. We
empirically show that our augmented DQN has
lower sample complexity when simultaneously
learning subtasks with negative transfer, without
degrading performance when learning subtasks
with positive transfer.

1
Introduction
Recent advances in reinforcement learning have focused on
using deep neural networks to represent the state-action value
function (Q-function) [Mnih et al., 2015] or a policy func-
tion [Levine et al., 2015]. The successes of such methods
are largely attributed to the representational power of deep
networks. It is tempting to create an ultimate end-to-end so-
lution to general problems with these kinds of powerful mod-
els. However, these general methods require large amount of
samples in order to learn effective policies.
In order to reduce sample complexity, one can use domain
knowledge to construct an algorithm that is biased towards
promising solutions. The deep Q-network (DQN) [Mnih et
al., 2015] is an end-to-end reinforcement learning algorithm
that has achieved great success on a variety of video games
[Bellemare et al., 2013]. In this work, we explore the possi-
bility of imposing some structural priors onto the DQN as a
way of adding domain knowledge, whilst trying to limit the
reduction in generality of the DQN.
In classical reinforcement learning literature, there is a
large amount of research focusing on temporal abstraction
of problems, which is known under the umbrella of hierar-
chical reinforcement learning. The options framework [Sut-
ton et al., 1999] augments the set of admissible actions with
temporally-extended actions that are called options. In this
context, an option is a closed-loop controller that can exe-
cute either primitive actions or other options according to its

1.1
Related Work

Our “option heads” are inspired by Osband et al. [2016].
Their policy network is similar to ours, but without the ad-
ditional supervisory network.
Their network’s “bootstrap
heads” are used with different motivations. They train each
of the heads, with different initialisations, on the same task.
This allows the network to represent a distribution over Q-
functions.
Exploration is done “deeply” by sampling one
head and using its policy for the whole episode, while the
experiences are shared across the heads. Our motivation for
using option heads, however, is for allowing the use of tem-
porally abstracted actions akin to the options framework, or
more concretely, as a way to decompose the policy into a
combination of simpler sub-policies. This motivates the use
of a supervisory network, which is discussed in Subsection
3.2.

2
Background

Consider a reinforcement learning problem, where we want
to ﬁnd an agent’s policy π which maximises the expected dis-
counted reward, E[R] = E [P

t γtrt]. The discount parame-
ter, γ ∈[0, 1], controls the importance of immediate rewards
relative to more distant rewards in the future. The reward rt
is a scalar value emitted from a state st ∈S. The policy se-
lects and performs an action at ∈A in response to the state
st, which then transitions to st+1. The transition of states is
modelled as a Markov decision process (MDP) where each
state is a sufﬁcient statistic of the entire history, so that the
transition at time t need only depend on st−1 and the action
at−1. See [Sutton and Barto, 1998] for a full introduction.
The Q-learning algorithm [Watkins, 1989] solves the re-
inforcement learning problem by approximating the optimal
state-action value or Q-function, Q∗(st, at), which is deﬁned
as the expected discounted reward starting from state st and
taking initial action at, and henceforth following the optimal
policy π∗:
Q∗(st, at) = E[Rt|st, at, π∗]

The Q-function must satisfy the Bellman equation,

Q∗(st, at) = Est+1[rt + γ max
at+1 Q∗(st+1, at+1)].

We can approximate the Q-function with a function approx-
imator Q(s, a; θ), with parameters θ. Learning is done by
adjusting the parameters in such a way to reduce the inconsis-
tency between the left and the right hand sides of the Bellman
equation. The optimal policy can be derived by simply choos-
ing the action that maximises Q∗(s, a) at each time step.

2.1
Deep Q-networks

The DQN [Mnih et al., 2015] is a convolutional neural net-
work that represents the Q-function Q(s, a; θ) with parame-
ters θ. The (online) network is trained by minimising a se-
quence of loss functions at iteration i:

Li(θi) = Es,a,r,s′[(yi −Q(s, a; θi))2]

yi = r + γ max
a′ Q(s′, a′; θ−)
(1)

The parameters θ−are associated with a separate target
network, which is updated with θi every τ steps. The target
network increases the stability of the learning. The param-
eters θi are updated with mini-batch stochastic gradient de-
scent following the gradient of the loss function.
Another key to the successful training of DQNs is the use
of experience replay [Lin, 1992]. Updating the parameters,
θi, with stochastic gradient descent on the squared loss func-
tion implies an i.i.d. assumption which is not valid in an
online reinforcement learning problem. Experience replay
stores samples of past transitions in a pool. While training,
samples are drawn uniformly from this pool. This helps break
the temporal correlation between samples and also allows up-
dates to reuse samples several times.

yi = r + γQ(s′, argmax
a′
Q(s′, a′; θi); θ−).

2.3
The Options Framework
The orginal deﬁnition of options [Sutton et al., 1999] consists
of three components: a policy, π, a termination condition, β,
and an initiation set, I. We illustrate the role of these compo-
nents by following the interpretation by Daniel et al. [2012].
Consider a stochastic policy, π(at|st), or a distribution
over actions, at, given state, st, at time step t. We add an aux-
iliary variable, ot ∈O, such that at is dependent on ot, and,
ot is dependent on st and ot−1. This variable ot controls the
selection of action at through their conditional dependence,
π(at|st, ot), and can be interpreted as the policy of a Markov
option ot. The termination condition, β, can be thought of as
a speciﬁc constraint of the conditional form, imposed on the
transition of the option as follows:

π(ot|ot−1, st) ∝β(st, ot−1)π(ot|st)
+ δot,ot−1(1 −β(st, ot−1)),

Figure 1: Comparison of DQN architectures. a) Standard
DQN. b) DQN with 2 option heads.

where δot,ot−1 is 1 when ot = ot−1 and 0 otherwise. The
initiation set speciﬁes the domain of st available to π(ot|st).
We consider a fully observable MDP where st is assumed
to be a sufﬁcient statistic for all the history before t, including
ot−1. Therefore, we can model ot to be conditionally inde-
pedent of ot−1 given st. We deﬁne our “supervisory policy”
as π(ot|st). Both the termination condition and the initiation
set are absorbed into the supervisory policy. The full policy
is then decomposed into:

setting, the set of games are so different that the states are un-
likely to have many features in common [Rusu et al., 2015],
but we would assume that in a hierarchical reinforcement
learning setting with subtasks this problem does not occur.
In addition to our augmented policy network, Qo(s, a) :
O × S × A →R, where o indexes over option heads, we
also introduce a supervisory network, O(s) : S →O, which
learns a mapping from a state to an option; this allows each
option head to focus on a subset of the state space. With our
networks, our full policy can be written as a deterministic
mapping, π(s) : S →A,

π(at|st) =
X

ot
π(ot|st)π(at|ot, st).

This form of policy can be seen as a combination of option
policies, weighted by the supervisory policy. We will show
in the next section how we decompose the DQN into separate
option policies, alongside a supervisory policy.

π(s) = argmax
a
QO(s)(s, a)

3.1
Option Heads

3
Deep Q-networks with Option Heads

The option heads consist of fully connected layers which
branch out from the topmost shared convolution layer. The
ﬁnal layer of each head outputs the Q-value for each dis-
crete action available, and hence can be limited using do-
main knowledge of the task at hand and the desired options.
While training, an oracle is used to choose which option head
should be evaluated at each time step t. The action at is
picked with the ϵ-greedy strategy on the ot head, where ϵ is
shared between all heads. The experience samples are tuples
of (st, at, st+1, rt), and are stored in separate experience re-
play buffers for each head. During evaluation the oracle is
replaced with the decisions of the supervisory network.

We augment the standard DQN with several distinct sets
of outputs; concretely we use the same architecture as the
bootstrapped DQN [Osband et al., 2016] or the MCDQN
[Parisotto et al., 2015]. As with the MCDQN, we use domain
knowledge to choose the number of heads a priori, and use
this same knowledge to train each option head separately. A
comparison between a standard DQN and a DQN with option
heads that we use is pictured in Figure 1. As noted in [Rusu
et al., 2015], even this augmentation can fail in a multitask
setting with different policies interfering at the lower levels
of the network, which highlights the need for further study.
Along with other work on the DQN, we assume that the
convolutional layers learn a general representation of the state
space, whilst the fully connected layers at the top of the net-
work encode most of the actual policy. In the multitask Atari

3.2
Supervisory Network

The supervisory network is an arbitrary neural network clas-
siﬁer which represents the supervisory policy. The input layer

Figure 2: 8 frames of Catch. The ﬁrst row shows the white
ball subtask, and the second row shows the grey ball subtask.

receives the entire state. The hidden layers can be constructed
using domain knowledge, e.g. convolutional layers for visual
domains. The output layer is a softmax layer which outputs
the distribution over options, ot, given the state, st, and can be
trained with the standard cross-entropy loss function. During
training the targets are given from an oracle.

4
Experiments

For our experiments we reimplemented the game of “Catch”
[Mnih et al., 2014], where the task is to control a paddle at
the bottom of the screen to catch falling balls (see Figure 2).
The input is a greyscale 24x24 pixel grid, and the action space
consists of 3 discrete actions: move left, move right and a no-
op. As in [Mnih et al., 2015], the DQN receives a stack of the
current plus previous 3 frames. During each episode a 1 pixel
ball falls randomly from the top of the screen, and the agent’s
2-pixel-wide paddle must move horizontally to catch it. In
the original a reward of +1 is given for catching a white ball;
we add an additional grey ball to introduce subtasks into the
environment. This simple environment allows us to meaning-
fully evaluate the effects of the architecture on subtasks with
positive and negative transfer. For the positive transfer case
the subtasks are the same—catching either ball results in a
reward of +1. In the negative transfer case the grey ball still
gives a reward of +1, but catching the white ball results in a
reward of -1. In this subtask the optimal agent must learn to
catch the grey balls and avoid the perceptually-similar white
balls; suboptimal solutions would include avoiding or catch-
ing both types of balls. In both setups the type of ball used is
switched every episode.
Our baseline is the standard DQN. In order to provide a fair
comparison, we impose one condition on the architecture of
our policy network, and one condition on its training. For the
ﬁrst condition we divide the number of neurons in the hid-
den layer of each option head by the number of option heads,
thereby keeping the number of parameters the same. For the
second condition we alternate heads when performing the Q-
learning update, keeping the number of training samples the
same. We also construct a “half DQN”, which contains half
the parameters of the standard DQN in the fully connected
hidden layer; this uses the standard architecture, not the op-
tion heads. This tests whether the sample complexity of our
DQN with option heads is either the result of having fewer
parameters to tune in each head, or the result of our imposed
structural constraint. More details on the model architectures
and training hyperparameters are given in the Appendix.

5
Discussion

We show that with a simple architectural adjustment, it is pos-
sible to successfully impose prior domain knowledge about
subtasks into the DQN algorithm. We demonstrate this idea
in a game of catch, where the task of catching or avoiding
falling balls depending on their colour can be decomposed
intuitively into the subtask of catching grey balls and another
subtask of avoiding white balls—subtasks that incur negative
transfer. We show that learning the subtasks separately on dif-
ferent option heads allows the DQN to learn with lower sam-
ple complexity. The shared convolutional layers learn gener-
ally useful features, whilst the heads learn to specialise. In
comparison, the standard DQN presumably suffers from sub-
task interference with only a single Q-function. Additionally,
the structural constraint does not hinder performance when
learning subtasks with positive transfer.
Our results are contrary to those reported with the MCDQN
trained on eight Atari games simultaneously, which was out-
performed by a standard DQN [Parisotto et al., 2015]. Ac-
cording to Parisotto et al. [2015], the standard DQN and
MCDQN tend to focus on performing well on a subset of
games at the expense of the others. We posit that this “strat-
egy” works well for the DQN, whilst the explicitly con-

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

Positive Transfer

0.6

Average Scores

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

Half DQN
Standard DQN
Option Heads

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

Negative Transfer

0.3

0.3

0.3

Average Scores

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

Half DQN
Standard DQN
Option Heads

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.1

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

0
20
40
60
80
100
Epoch

Figure 3: The average score per episode of the standard DQN, half DQN and DQN with 2 option heads. The average and
standard deviation are calculated over 15 runs (with different random seeds), with the score for each run being averaged over
250 episodes. Each epoch corresponds to 10000 training steps. The number of neurons corresponds to the number of neurons in
the fully connected hidden layer of the standard DQN. In the positive transfer setting the most important factor is capacity, not
the architecture. As capacity increases the difference in performance between the networks diminishes. In the negative transfer
setting the effect of capacity is strong when capacity is very low, but otherwise the DQN with option heads demonstrates a
superior sample complexity over the baselines. Best viewed in colour.

References

structed controller heads on the MCDQN receive more con-
sistent training signals, which may cause parameter gradients
that interfere with each other in the shared convolutional lay-
ers [Caruana, 2012; Rusu et al., 2015]. This is less of a con-
cern in the hierarchical reinforcement learning setting as we
assume a more coherent state space across all subtasks.
In the regime of subtasks rather than multiple tasks, the
DQN with option heads is not as generalisable as goal-based
approaches [Schaul et al., 2015; Kulkarni et al., 2016]. How-
ever, these methods currently require a hand-crafted represen-
tation of the goals as input for their networks—a sensible ap-
proach only when the goal representation can be reasonably
appended to the state space. In contrast, our oracle mapping
from states to options can be used when constructing rep-
resentations of goals as inputs is not a straightforward task.
This suggests future work in removing the oracle by focus-
ing on option discovery, where the agent must learn options
without the use of a supervisory signal.

[Bellemare et al., 2013] Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf,
Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The Arcade Learning
Environment: An Evaluation Platform for General Agents.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279,
2013.

[Caruana, 2012] Rich Caruana. A dozen tricks with multi-
task learning. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade,
pages 163–189. Springer, 2012.

[Daniel et al., 2012] Christian Daniel, Gerhard Neumann,
and Jan R Peters.
Hierarchical relative entropy policy
search. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Statistics, pages 273–281, 2012.

[Dietterich, 2000] Thomas G Dietterich. Hierarchical rein-
forcement learning with the MAXQ value function de-
composition. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,
13:227–303, 2000.

Acknowledgements

[Hinton et al., 2015] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and
Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

The authors gratefully acknowledge a gift of equipment from
NVIDIA Corporation and the support of the EPSRC CDT in
Neurotechnology.

Appendix

[Levine et al., 2015] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor
Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.00702,
2015.

A
Model
We use a smaller DQN than the one speciﬁed in [Mnih et
al., 2015]. The baseline (standard) DQN architecture that we
used in our experiments, with a capacity of “32 neurons”, is
as follows:

[Lin, 1992] Long-Ji Lin.
Self-improving reactive agents
based on reinforcement learning, planning and teaching.
Machine learning, 8(3-4):293–321, 1992.

Layer
Speciﬁcation
1
32 5x5 spatial convolution, 2x2 stride, 1x1 zero-padding, ReLU
2
32 5x5 spatial convolution, 2x2 stride, ReLU
3
32 fully connected, ReLU
4
3 fully connected
As our version of Catch can be divided into 2 distinct sub-
tasks, our policy network therefore has 2 option heads. Each
option head has 16 neurons each in the penultimate fully con-
nected layers—half that of the baseline DQN. The half DQN
therefore also has 16 neurons in the penultimate fully con-
nected layer. The same formula is employed when testing
with a capacity of 16 and 64 neurons.
Unlike [Osband et al., 2016], we do not normalise the gra-
dients coming through each option head, as the errors are only
backpropagated through one head at a time.

[Mnih et al., 2014] Volodymyr Mnih, Nicolas Heess, Alex
Graves, et al. Recurrent models of visual attention. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
2204–2212, 2014.

[Mnih et al., 2015] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidje-
land, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533,
2015.

[Osband et al., 2016] Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexan-
der Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy.
Deep Exploration
via Bootstrapped DQN. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.04621,
2016.

B
Hyperparameters
Hyperparameters were originally manually tuned for the
model with the original version of Catch [Mnih et al., 2014]
(only white balls giving a reward of +1). We then performed
a hyperparameter search over learning rates ∈{0.000125,
0.00025, 0.0005}, target network update frequencies ∈{4,
32, 128}, and ﬁnal values of ϵ ∈{0.01, 0.05}. The learning
rate with the best performance for all models was 0.00025,
except for the standard DQN and half DQN in the negative
transfer setting, where 0.000125 was better. This is an inter-
esting ﬁnding—with negative transfer the standard architec-
ture requires a lower learning rate, whilst with option heads a
higher learning rate can still be used. The following hyperpa-
rameters were used for all models, where only hyperparame-
ters that differ from those used in [Van Hasselt et al., 2015]
for the tuned double DQN are given:

[Parisotto et al., 2015] Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and
Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Actor-Mimic:
Deep Multitask
and Transfer Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.

[Rusu et al., 2015] Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Col-
menarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James
Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy Distillation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.

[Schaul et al., 2015] Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol
Gregor, and David Silver.
Universal Value Function
Approximators.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-15), pages
1312–1320, 2015.

[Sutton and Barto, 1998] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G
Barto.
Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT
press, 1998.

Hyperparameters
Value
Description
Replay
memory size
10000
Size of each experience replay memory buffer.

[Sutton et al., 1999] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and
Satinder Singh.
Between MDPs and semi-MDPs:
A
framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement
learning. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 112(1):181–211, 1999.

Target network
update frequency
4
Frequency (in number of steps) with which
the target network parameters are updated
with the policy network parameters.
Optimiser
Adam
Stochastic gradient descent optimiser.
Final exploration
frame
10000
Number of steps over which ϵ is linearly an-
nealed.
Replay start
size
10000
Number of steps of random exploration before
ϵ is annealed.
Gradient
clipping
10
Max absolute value of the L2 norm of the gra-
dients.
Validation
frequency
10000
Number of steps after which evaluation is run.

[Van Hasselt et al., 2015] Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez,
and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with dou-
ble Q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.06461, 2015.

[Watkins, 1989] Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins.
Learning from delayed rewards. PhD thesis, University of
Cambridge England, 1989.

Validation
steps
6000
Number of steps to use during evaluation.
Corresponds to 250 episodes of Catch.