Simultaneous Control and Human Feedback in the Training
of a Robotic Agent with Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning

Kory Mathewson and Patrick M. Pilarski
Departments of Computing Science and Medicine
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

[korym, pilarski] @ ualberta.ca

Abstract

and movements, control of this functionality by humans is
still limited [Biddiss et al., 2007]. New methods must be
developed to help humans control complex robotic devices
that are directly connected to them. Furthermore, such
methods should incorporate some form of ongoing learning
so that the device can adapt to the human who is wearing it.

This paper contributes a preliminary report on the
advantages and disadvantages of incorporating
simultaneous human control and feedback signals
in the training of a reinforcement learning robotic
agent. While robotic human-machine interfaces
have become increasingly complex in both form
and function, control remains challenging for users.
This has resulted in an increasing gap between user
control approaches and the number of robotic actu-
ators which can be controlled. One way to address
this gap is to shift autonomy to the robot. Semi-
autonomous actions of the robotic agent can then
be shaped and refined by human feedback, simpli-
fying user control. Most prior work on human-
agent shaping has incorporated training with feed-
back, or has included indirect control signals. By
contrast, in this paper we explore how a human can
provide concurrent feedback signals and real-time
myoelectric control signals to train a robot’s actor-
critic reinforcement learning control system. Using
both a physical and a simulated robotic system, we
compare training performance on a simple move-
ment task when reward is derived from the envi-
ronment, from the human, and from the combina-
tion of the two. Our results indicate that benefit
may be gained by including human generated feed-
back in learning algorithms for this complex hu-
man-machine interactive domain.

Myoelectric prostheses are a class of modern robotic
prosthesis which monitor electrical signals produced by
muscle tissue in the patient’s residual limb and use these
signals to control the movement of a multiple-actuator ro-
botic appendage [Parker et al., 2006]. Myoelectric control
aims to remove functionality barriers for patients, but can be
a challenge for new amputees; the transition to a powered
prosthesis often requires extensive training and repeated
calibration of the limb by clinicians. This difficulty is partly
due to the user’s inability to provide clear electromyograph-
ic (EMG) control signals, and partly due to control chal-
lenges in interpreting these complex multi-dimensional sig-
nals to guide robotic movements [Castellini et al., 2014].

Another major limitation in most of the current prosthetic
control schemes is the lack of adaptation over time. The
need for adaptation may stem from changes in the patient
physical and mental states, intents, and/or usage [Sensinger
et al., 2009]. Changing learned control policies requires
expert knowledge of a patient’s physiology and prosthetic
hardware. Most users can not adaptively improve the control
of their robotic limb independently, outside of the clinic.

A significant amount of past work has been done to ad-
dress these challenges by incorporating machine learning
into prosthetic control systems [Castellini et al., 2014, Par-
ker et al., 2006]. Examples include offline, supervised learn-
ing methods of dimensionality reduction [Englehart et al.,
2003, Artemiadis et al., 2010], artificial neural networks,
and support vector machines [Oskoei and Hu, 2008], as well
as unsupervised [Sensinger et al., 2009], and semi-
supervised [Nishikawa et al., 2001] techniques. A recent
review by Castellini et al. provides a good overview of the
state-of-the-art myoelectric prosthetic control research [Cas-
tellini et al., 2014]. Adaptive, real-time approaches to ad-
dressing challenges in myoelectric control have also been
proposed and shown to work in simulation, and in prelimi-
nary experiments with able-bodied subjects and subjects
with amputations [Edwards et al., 2015]. As well, previous

1 Introduction

Human-robot interaction is becoming more complex with
the advancement of actuator and sensor technologies. One
key example is that of robotic prostheses: artificial limbs
attached to the body to replace abilities lost through injury
or illness. Prosthetic limbs that have comparable degrees of
freedom (DoF) and movement to human limbs have now
been developed. A principal limitation is the complex con-
trol of such devices [Castellini et al., 2014] by humans. One
of the main reasons that users reject the use of prosthetic
devices is the functional limitations of the limb. While state-
of-the-art prosthetic limbs can perform complex functions

D

C
A

B

In this work we first review the necessary background as
well as ongoing research in the field of incorporating real-
time human-delivered feedback into a learning system. Then
we explore a means by which the human and robot can col-
laborate interactively through control and feedback signals.
We show how the human EMG signals define the robotic
state space, and then explore the differences between using
a conventional, task defined reward paradigms versus using
human generated reward signal, and the combination of
these reward sources. To demonstrate the challenges associ-
ated with simultaneous control of a robotic device and real-
time direct human feedback delivering reward, we briefly
describe the system configuration and user experience. Ex-
periments in this paper provide new insight into the practi-
cality of simultaneous human control and feedback signals
in the training of robotic systems with many DoF.

Figure 1. Configration with A) results, B) Myo, C)
Simulation/Learning/Feedback System, and D) Nao.

work describes how these advances in prosthetic device
control can be viewed as increasing communicative capital
between two goal-seeking agents, the prosthetic and the
human wearing it [Pilarski et al., 2015]. One promising
adaptive method pairs human training of controllers with
continuous-action
actor-critic
reinforcement
learning
(ACRL) [Degris et al., 2012, Pilarski et al., 2011 and 2013].
We expand this ACRL approach in the present paper.

Reinforcement learning (RL) was introduced as a theory
of how humans and animals learn in response to positive
and negative stimuli associated with actions towards a goal
[Thorndike, 1898; Skinner, 1938]. In the early 1980’s Sut-
ton extended this concept to simulated learning agents and
early work applied RL to difficult control problems [Sutton,
1984; Barto et al., 1983]. RL is an approach for solving the-
se control problems through interaction between a learning
system and the environment, and provides a theoretical
backing of convergence in well defined domains [Sutton
and Barto, 1998].

2 Background

2.1 Reinforcement Learning
RL is a learning framework inspired by behaviorists
[Thorndike, 1898; Skinner, 1938]. It describes how agents
improve over time by taking actions in an environment with
a goal of maximizing some reward signal [Sutton and Barto,
1998]. The control policy is iteratively improved by select-
ing the actions which maximize future reward signals accu-
mulated by the agent. Commonly, RL problems are defined
by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) which are defined
by the tuple: (𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑇, 𝛾, 𝑅). S defines the state, or the current
observable environmental variables of the agent, A defines
the actions which the agent can take, T is the transition
probabilities between the current state s and the next state s’,
given a specific action a was taken or more formally
𝑇𝑠’ 𝑠, 𝑎, 𝛾 defines the discount factor, or how much fu-
ture reward is valued by the agent and takes a value between
[0,1] where 1 values all possible future reward, and 0 val-
ues no future reward, R is a reward function based on state
transitions.

RL methods, and specifically ACRL methods, are well
suited to the prosthetic control learning task [Pilarski et al.
2011]. ACRL methods are parameter based, allowing linear,
incremental computation of variables, which in turn allows
fast updates even with very large problems. ACRL does not
store past samples in memory, thus memory requirements
remain constant through learning, allowing for long term
learning and deployment on embedded hardware with lim-
ited resources. The methods can use temporally extended
credit assignment, making it theoretically possible to learn
quickly with sparse reward signals. When combined with
function approximation, these methods can scale well to
continuous-space real-world tasks [Thomas et al., 2009].
Finally, ACRL provides an intuitive means for incorpora-
tion of human interaction in the form of scalar, goal-directed
signals [Pilarski et al. 2011, Knox and Stone, 2015].

Similar past work has explored the applicability of incor-
porating ACRL methods in human-robot collaborative
tasks. Peters and Schaal demonstrated ACRL learning of
complex movement systems and motor primitives for hu-
manoid robotics [Peters and Schaal, 2008], Izawa et al.
showed that RL allowed a simulated biological two-joint
arm to learn a reaching task [Izawa et al., 2004], and Tamei
and Shibata used a policy-based RL system which used
EMG from an able bodied subject to control a robotic arm in
a collaborative lifting task [Tamei and Shibata 2008].

The goal of an RL agent is to determine the correct action
execution order, or behavior, to maximize the expected sum
of future discounted reward, or expected return. This behav-
ior is defined as the policy which dictates which action
should be taken in a given state, or 𝜋∶𝑆→𝐴. RL ap-
proaches may be policy-based, searching the policy space
directly, or value-based, estimating the value of possible
actions in each state and then deriving a policy from these
value estimations [Sutton and Barto, 1998]. The value, or
quality, of a given state and action is defined by a Q-
function, 𝑄∶𝑆 𝑥 𝐴→𝑅. Temporal difference algorithms,

The MDP may define either discrete or continuous state
and action spaces. In continuous domains, the MDP con-
tains an infinite set of states 𝑠 𝜖 ℝ45 and actions 𝑎 𝜖 ℝ,
where ns is the number of dimensions of S. In this paper, we
will denote 𝑠6, 𝑎6, 𝑟6 as the state, action, and reward at time t;
note that action 𝑎6 may affect the reward accumulated on
future time steps (𝑟689, 𝑡> 0) but not the current 𝑟6.

2.2 The Continuous Actor-Critic Algorithm
In this paper we will focus on actor-critic algorithms, a sub-
set of policy gradient based algorithms. In these algorithms,
the control policy 𝜋𝑎𝑠 is a function which defines the
probability with which the system will select an action a in
a state s. 𝜋 is characterized by a vector of parameters
𝒘 𝜖 ℝ4, we assume that for any state-action pair 𝜋𝑎𝑠 is
differentiable in w. The goal of policy-based methods is to
find a policy 𝜋 which maximizes expected return. Policy-
based methods update the policy parameter vector w in the
direction of the gradient of the return with respect to w
[Williams, 1992]. This gradient can be estimated from sam-
ples of interaction between the learning agent and the envi-
ronment (𝑠6, 𝑎6, 𝑠689, 𝑟689) [Sutton et al., 1999]. This gradi-
ent estimation technique can have high variance, and thus
require a large number of samples to converge.

In this paper, we focus on incorporating direct human
feedback into the MDP. This work is most similar to [Pilar-
ski et al., 2011 and 2013], where ACRL was used in a con-
tinuous robotic task. Those works used a variety of reward
schemes, some of which depend on some knowledge of the
problem domain. While more advanced, task specific re-
ward schemes may help the agent converge faster than con-
stant positive or negative rewards, this knowledge may not
be available during learning, and/or the task definition may
change.

Actor-critic (AC) methods aim to reduce this variance by
using two learning systems: an actor and a critic. The actor
shapes the policy 𝜋 and selects the actions, and the critic
predicts the expected return while following the policy 𝜋.
The critic represents the value function of the current policy
𝜋 in the state s. While this value function is not known, it
can be estimated using temporal difference learning, this
estimate is then used to compute the change in the parame-
ter vector, or ∆𝒘. Because S is continuous in the variables
defining it, a standard function approximation technique
known as tile coding is often used to transform the state s
into a high-dimensional binary feature vector 𝑥𝑠. This
discretizes the space, and allows for generalization in the
learned policies [Sutton and Barto, 1998]. Details in this
paper are limited to those relevant to the experimental defi-
nition and results. More comprehensive details on ACRL
algorithms are given by [Sutton and Barto, 1998] and [Pe-
ters and Schaal, 2008].

3 Methods

3.1 Aldebaran Nao and Myo EMG Data
The experimental set up is shown in Figure 1. It is com-
posed of the Aldebaran Nao robotic platform (Aldebaran
Robotics), the wireless Myo EMG armband (Thalmic Labs),
and a Mac Book Air (Apple, 2.2 GHz Intel Core i7, 8GB
RAM) for human feedback and running the learning agent.

The Aldebaran Nao was chosen as a cost-effective physi-
cal test platform to experiment with algorithm development.
Specifically, the upper arms were chosen to mimic some of
the functionality of high DoF commercial myoelectric pros-
theses. Shown in Figure 1, the Nao has 25 DoF, the arm on
the Nao has 6 DoF: shoulder pitch and roll, elbow yaw and
roll, wrist yaw, and hand open/close. While the size of the
Nao arm is less than that of commercial prosthetic devices,
it provides a good test-bed for algorithmic development.

2.3 Incorporating Human Feedback

There are a variety of ways to incorporate human
knowledge into a learning system, prior to, or during learn-
ing. Learning from demonstration, reward shaping, and in-
verse RL are all areas of active research closely connected
with the work in this paper, a comprehensive review of
those methods can be found elsewhere [Thomaz and
Breazeal, 2008; Chernova and Tomaz 2014].

Experimentation took place on the physical device as well
as on the accompanying simulation software for the Aldeba-
ran Nao. This simulation software shares the dimensions
and kinematic model of the physical device. On each time
step, an angular change is sent to the joint which is autono-
mously controlled by the learning algorithm.

Knox and Stone introduced the Interactive Shaping Prob-
lem or how the feedback from the human can be best incor-
porated into the learning agent in a sequential decision mak-
ing process [Knox et al. 2010]. Briefly, it is summarized as

4 Experiments

This work explores the incorporation of simultaneous con-
trol and direct human feedback into a RL agent running on
an Aldebaran Nao. The goal of the task was to output joint
velocity commands to the Nao’s left arm to track a two-
phase, periodic, target angle trajectory, demonstrated with
the right arm, well within the maximum joint angle range.

In learning an optimal control policy in a simple motion
tracking sequence, 4 experimental reward conditions were
considered: 1) fixed goal-based reward where 𝑟Z[\]^ = 1 if
the joint is within a deviation threshold, ∆𝜃`I\, of the target
joint angle, 𝜃6, else 𝑟Z[\]^ = −0.5, 2) relative goal-based
reward where 𝑟H]aI6[b] = 1 if the joint is within ∆𝜃`I\ of 𝜃6,
else 𝑟H]aI6[b] = − | 𝜃− 𝜃6| , 3) strictly human-delivered
reward where the human could deliver a reward of 𝑟d =
1 𝑜𝑟−0.5 by pressing corresponding positive or negative
keys, and 4) learning from the combination of fixed goal-
based and human reward conditions, 𝑟6f6Ia = 𝑟Z[\]^ + 𝑟d.

3.1 The Learning Algorithm

The continuous actor-critic algorithm used in this paper is
a slightly modified version of an ACRL algorithm described
previously [Pilarski et al. 2011; Pilarski et al., 2013]. The
algorithm is detailed in Algorithm 1. The actor selects a new
action a from a normal distribution 𝑁𝜇, 𝜎P defined by
mean
𝜇= 𝑤R

S𝑥(𝑠)
and
standard
deviation
𝜎=
exp (𝑤W

The action space of the learning system consisted of a
single continuous angular displacement value for the Left
Elbow Roll of the Aldebaran Nao. This angular displace-
ment value was clipped in the range [-0.05, 0.05] to ensure
smooth motion and exploration of the state space. As well,
actions which would take the joint outside of the Nao's al-
lowable range were clipped to their allowable values. Ac-
tions were selected and performed on each time step as
shown in Algorithm 1. A continuous state space consisting
of 𝑠= < 𝜃]H, > was used, where 𝜃]H indicated the left
elbow roll joint angle, and was the EMG control signal
computed as described in Section 3.1. All the components
in s were normalized to the range [0, 1] according to their
maximum and minimum possible values prior to use in
function approximation [Pilarski et al., 2011 and 2013].

S 𝑥𝑠). Actions in this work are defined as continu-
ous angular increments or decrements. 𝑤X and 𝑤W are pa-
rameter vectors for the mean and standard deviation of the
actor system. The system selects and executes an action a,
which transitions the agent into new state s’ and generates a
reward r, then the critic, which is defined by a parameter
vector v, computes a TD-error from r, and the current esti-
mates of the value of the old state s and the new state, s’.
Each learning system (actor and critic) is defined by alpha,
or scalar step-size parameters.

A major consideration in the RL framework is how to as-
sign reward to past state-action pairs which may have con-
tributed to the current state, this is known as the credit as-
signment problem. Eligibility traces are a common mecha-

The continuous state space was function approximated
using tile coding to allow for discretization and generaliza-
tion of the state space [Pilarski et al., 2011 and 2013]. Tile
coding was used to construct the state approximation vector
x(s) used in learning. To capture a variety of generalization
levels, x(s) was a concatenation which combined 𝑁S = 5
offset tilings of s (which is 2-dimensional), at 3 different
resolution levels, 𝑁h = 3,5,8 , along with a single active
baseline unit. This resulted in a single binary feature vector
consisting
of
(5 ∗ 3P) + (5 ∗ 5P) + (5 ∗ 8P) + 1 =
491 features, exactly 𝑚= 16 features in x(s) were active at
a given time, one for each tiling at each resolution and one
for the active baseline feature. The learning parameters were
set as follows: 𝛼b = 0.01 𝑚, 𝛼X = 0.005 𝑚, 𝛼W = 𝛼X,

The ACRL system was trained online, with EMG control
signals being read directly from the user. Learning updates
and action choice occurred at ~33Hz or every ~30 ms. Total
training time steps were held constant for the experiments.
Performance was measured by taking the average mean ab-
solute angular error from 1) all the data, 2) the last 10k
steps, 3) the last 5k steps. This was done to compare the
experimental results after some learning was completed; this
helped to reduce the noise intrinsic in early learning.

With this experimental set up we were able to test our
four experimental conditions on the physical robot, with live
EMG fed into the learning system, and we were able to test
the performance of the learning using a simulated robotic
agent, and a simulated EMG source. These simulations al-
lowed us to rapidly test the learning over a large number of
repetitions. Figure 3 shows the comparison between the
physical and simulated robot and real and simulated EMG.

Figure 2. Representative results from 40k learning steps with
human reward combined with fixed-goal based reward.

For the human EMG experiments the subject (1 healthy
male, 28 yr.) gave informed consent to participate, and the
trial was approved by the human research ethics board at the
University of Alberta. The subject was directed to perform a
repeated task; they were instructed to follow the movement
of the robotic arm in reaching and retracting by flexing or
relaxing their wrist. When the EMG signal was simulated it
was derived from a noisy estimation of the target signal. As
previously described by [Pilarski et al., 2011], to provide a
human training signal (experimental conditions 3 and 4)
across the fast learning algorithm, the reward signal on each
time step following delivery was set to a decayed trace of
the reward of the previous step, or: 𝑟689 = 0.01 𝑟6 + 𝑟d.
This allowed human delivered feedback, which occurs on
the second time scale to be smeared across actions occurring
over the millisecond time scale.

error threshold is shown dotted around the target angle. The
agent learns a near optimal policy after ~15k time steps,
after which it accumulates reward consistently. The agent
mean and standard deviation plots show multiple phases
learned by the agent; these are the repeating locations on the
target trajectory learned as the agent gains certainty in opti-
mal actions to select in each phase.

Figure 3 compares learning performance on the simula-
tion and physical robotic and EMG configurations. It shows
the mean angle error (MAE) over varying numbers of times
steps. MAE is the difference between the target and the
learning system controlled joint angle, averaged over a) all
time steps, b) the last 10k time steps and c) the last 5k time
steps. For several conditions, multiple trials were run, as
denoted by (n = number of trials) in the legend. In these
cases, mean and standard deviation over the number of trials
is reported. In the legend, when Nao or Myo is listed, it im-
plies that this performance was measured on the physical
robot or Myo system as opposed to simulation.

5 Results

Our results demonstrate a potential benefit to be had by in-
troducing human feedback into the robotic learning system.
The inclusion of human shaping signals was shown to im-
prove performance over strictly environmentally derived
reward, but increased the level of cognitive attention re-
quired of the user during training.

Figure 3 shows MAE over all time steps, the last 10k, and
last 5k time steps for 1) constant reward, 2) relative reward,
3) strictly human reward, and 4) constant + human reward
sources. The graph also has comparitive data for physical
and simulation robotic systems and EMG. When Myo or
Nao is listed (e.g. C,D,G,H), it implies the physical system
was used, otherwise, are from a simulation robot and/or
simulated EMG data. Figure 3 shows a close correlation
between real and simulated EMG signal experimental condi-
tions, and an important distinction between performance
when learning on a simulated versus a physical robot. This
result is to be expected; while the EMG control signal is not
noisy and is simple to simulate, the difference between a

Figure 2 shows the results of a single, representative, 40k
time step learning experiment for combined human and
fixed-goal based reward. It shows the total accumulated
reward, the actual target angle and learning system actuated
angle, as well as the learning agent mean and standard devi-
ation (as calculated in Algorithm (1). On the Actual and
Follow Angle plot the target angle is light gray, the learning
agent controlled joint is dark gray and the angular distance

Figure 3. Comparitive bar graph showing the aggregate
data over the multiple trials of each experimental condition.

The combination of the MDP and human-delivered re-
ward signals may modify the agent’s task definition. If hu-
man feedback is inconsistent, the changing task definition
may cause instability in the system. Potential-based reward
shaping may address this and should be explored
[Harutyunyan et al., 2015].

simulated versus physical robot is significant. As can be
seen in Figure 3, the performance of relative error reward is
superior to constant error reward learning in the simulated
robotics. This provides an indication that our learning algo-
rithm is utilizing the information contained within the re-
ward signal to refine its policy and action selection. The
results also indicate that strictly human reward based train-
ing performs the poorest over the given numbers of time
steps. This is most likely due to the noise inherent in human
delivered reward, as well as the potential errors in the hu-
man reward decay trace calculation. Figure 3 shows there
may be benefit to incorporating human feedback into the
learning system, potentially limited by the richness of the
environmental reward. The MAE for Constant Reward on
the simulated Nao with simulated EMG data is greater than
the value for when human feedback is included. The MAE
for Constant Reward with Human Feedback on the real Myo
and Nao falls within the standard deviation of the simulated
systems. This may be expected; while learning on physical
robots may hinder, human feedback may improve learning.

In this experiment only single joint control was learned;
it is possible to learn multiple joint policies concurrently. In
these paradigms, it is often valuable to break down the task
into regions of solvability to decrease the total time needed
to learn complex composite behaviors. This scaffold ap-
proach has been shown to decrease convergence times, and
make interactive human training easier and is a rich area for
future research [Pilarski et al., 2011, Sanger, 1994].

The main results reported here is the MAE overall and
late learning. Additional performance metrics to be explored
include convergence time, number of human interactions,
and more qualitative measures including cognitive burden.

7 Conclusions

This paper contributes a first set of results on incorporating
simultaneous human control and feedback signals in the
training of a semi-autonomous robotic agent. Our results
demonstrate performance increases by incorporating human-
feedback into existing algorithms, and show that human
interaction may improve performance in complex robotic
tasks. This work therefore provides a new viewpoint on the
human training of a robotic system tightly coupled to a us-
er’s body, and suggests that seamless interaction with com-
plex hardware may demand a shift of autonomy from the
human to the machine. Future work will explore methods to
reduce cognitive burden on the human and to model, gener-
alize, and deliver consistent human feedback.

6 Discussion

This work explores combinations of human and environ-
mental feedback in simulated and physical robotic systems
with simulated and real EMG control signals. Simulation
and physical experimentation show agreement, but some
performance decrease may be expected with physical robot-
ic systems. This performance decrease may be due heat,
inertia, and/or mechanical jitter. While there are benefits to
development and testing on a simulated robot, including
safety, controlled repeatability and batch processing, addi-
tional experimentation on physical robots is necessary to
support human-feedback derived improvement.

Acknowledgments

To speed up learning step size, 𝛾, EMG and human re-
ward decay parameters, and tile coding parameters were
selected to maximize the reward accumulated on the simu-
lated Myo and Nao. These parameters may not be optimal
for the physical Nao configuration, and could potentially be
adapted online in the future [Sherstov and Stone, 2005].

This work is supported by National Sciences & Engineering
Research Council of Canada, Alberta Innovates – Technol-
ogy Futures, and the Alberta Innovates Centre for Machine
Learning.

signal processing for control of powered limb prostheses. J Elec-
tromyogr Kinesiol. 2006. 16(6):541-8.
[Peters and Schaal, 2008] Peters J, Schaal S. Natural actor-critic.

[Artemiais and Kyriakopolous, 2010] Artemiadis PK, Kyriakopou-

los KJ. EMG-based control of a robot arm using low-dimensional
embeddings. IEEE Trans. Robotics. 2010. 26(2):393-8.
[Barto et al., 1983] Barto AG, Sutton RS, Anderson CW. Neuron-

Neurocomputing. 2008. 71(7):1180-90.
[Peters et al., 2003] Peters J, Vijayakumar S, Schaal S. Reinforce-

like adaptive elements that can solve difficult learning control
problems. IEEE Trans. Systems, Man & Cybernetics. 1983.
(5):834-46.
[Biddiss and Chau, 2007] Biddiss EA, Chau TT. Upper limb pros-

ment learning for humanoid robotics. 3rd IEEE-RAS Intl. Conf. on
Humanoid Robots. 2003 (pp. 1-20).
[Pilarski et al., 2011] Pilarski PM, Dawson MR, Degris T, Fahimi

F, Carey JP, Sutton RS. Online human training of a myoelectric
prosthesis controller via actor-critic reinforcement learning. IEEE
Intl. Conf. on Rehabilitation Robotics. 2011. (pp. 1-7). IEEE.
[Pilarski et al., 2013] Pilarski PM, Dick TB, Sutton RS. Real-time

thesis use and abandonment: a survey of the last 25 years. J Pros-
thet Orthot Intl. 2007. 31(3):236-57.
[Brys et al., 2015] Brys, T., Harutyunyan, A., Suay, H.B., Cherno-

va, S., Taylor, M.E. and Nowé, A., 2015, June. Reinforcement
learning from demonstration through shaping. In Proceedings of
the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[Castellini et al., 2014] Castellini C, Artemiadis P, Wininger M,

prediction learning for the simultaneous actuation of multiple
prosthetic joints. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Rehabilitation Robotics.
2013. (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
[Pilarski et al., 2015] Pilarski PM, Sutton RS, Mathewson KW.

Ajoudani A, Alimusaj M, Bicchi A, Caputo B, Craelius W, Dosen
S, Englehart K, Farina D. Proc. Of 1st Workshop on Peripheral
Machine Interfaces. 2014.
[Chernova and Tomaz 2014] Chernova S, Thomaz AL. Robot

Prosthetic Devices as Goal-Seeking Agents. 2nd Workshop on
Present and Future of Non-Invasive Peripheral-Nervous-System
Machine Interfaces, Singapore, 2015.
[Sanger, 1994] Sanger TD. Neural network learning control of

learning from human teachers. Syn. Lecs. on AI and ML. 2014.
8(3):1-21.
[Degris et al., 2012] Degris T, Pilarski PM, Sutton RS. Model-free

robot manipulators using gradually increasing task difficulty.
IEEE Trans. Robotics and Automation. 1994. 10(3):323-33.
[Sensinger et al., 2009] Sensinger JW, Lock BA, Kuiken TA.

reinforcement learning with continuous action in practice. Ameri-
can Control Conference. 2012 Jun 27 (pp. 2177-2182). IEEE.
[Edwards et al., 2015] Edwards AL, Dawson MR, Hebert JS,

Adaptive pattern recognition of myoelectric signals: exploration
of conceptual framework and practical algorithms. IEEE Trans.
Neural Sys. and Rehab. Eng. 2009. 17(3):270-8.
[Skinner, 1938] Skinner BF. The behavior of organisms: an exper-

Sherstan C, Sutton RS, Chan KM, Pilarski PM. Application of
real-time machine learning to myoelectric prosthesis control: A
case series in adaptive switching. J Prosthet Orthot Int. 2015.
[Englehart and Hudgins, 2003] Englehart K, Hudgins B. A robust,

imental analysis. Appleton-Century, Oxford. 1938.
[Sutton, 1984] Sutton RS. Temporal credit assignment in rein-

forcement learning. Doctoral Dissertation. 1984.
[Sutton and Barto, 1998] Sutton RS, Barto AG. Reinforcement

real-time control scheme for multifunction myoelectric control.
IEEE Trans. Biomed Eng. 2003. 50(7):848-54.
[Harutyunyan et al., 2015] Harutyunyan, A., Brys, T., Vrancx, P.

learning: An introduction. MIT Press. 1998.
[Sutton et al., 1999] Sutton RS, McAllester DA, Singh SP,

and Nowé, A., 2015, May. Shaping mario with human advice. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Int. Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems (pp. 1913-1914). International Founda-
tion for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
[Izawa and Ito, 2004] Izawa J, Kondo T, Ito K. Biological arm

Mansour Y. Policy Gradient Methods for Reinforcement Learn-
ing with Function Approximation. NIPS. 1999 (Vol. 99, pp. 1057-
1063).
[Tamei and Shibata, 2009] Tamei T, Shibata T. Policy gradient

learning of cooperative interaction with a robot using user’s bio-
logical signals. Adv. In Neuro-Information Processing. 2008 (pp.
1029-1037). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[Thomaz and Breazeal, 2008] Thomaz AL, Breazeal C. Teachable

motion through reinforcement learning. Biological cybernetics.
2004. 91(1):10-22.
[Knox and Stone, 2009] Knox WB, Stone P. Interactively shaping

agents via human reinforcement: The TAMER framework. In
Proc of 5th Intl. Conf. on Knowledge Capture. 2009 (9-16). ACM.
[Knox and Stone, 2012] Knox WB, Stone P. Reinforcement learn-

robots: Understanding human teaching behavior to build more
effective robot learners. Artificial Intelligence. 2008. 172(6):716-
37.
[Thomas et al., 2009] Thomas P, Branicky M, van den Bogert A,

ing from human reward: Discounting in episodic tasks. IEEE RO-
MAN. 2012. (pp. 878-885).
[Knox and Stone, 2015] Knox WB, Stone P. Framing reinforce-

Jagodnik K. Application of the actor-critic architecture to func-
tional electrical stimulation control of a human arm. Conf. Proc.
Innovative Applications of AI. 2009 (p. 165).
[Thorndike, 1898] Thorndike EL. Animal Intelligence. Nature.

ment learning from human reward: Reward positivity, temporal
discounting, episodicity, and performance. Artificial Intelligence.
2015. 225:24-50.
[Loftin et al., 2015] Loftin R, Peng B, MacGlashan J, Littman ML,

1898. 58:390.
[Vien and Ertel, 2013] Vien NA, Ertel W, Chung TC. Learning via

Taylor ME, Huang J, Roberts DL. Learning behaviors via human-
delivered discrete feedback: modeling implicit feedback strategies
to speed up learning. AAMAS. 2016. 30(1):30-59.
[Nisikawa et al., 2001] Nishikawa D, Yu W, Yokoi H, Kakazu Y.

human feedback in continuous state and action spaces. Applied
Intelligence. 2013. 39(2):267-78.
[Watkins and Dayan, 1992] Watkins CJ, Dayan P. Q-learning.

Machine Learning. 1992. 8(3-4):279-92.
[Williams, 1992] Williams RJ. Simple statistical gradient-

On-line learning method for EMG prosthetic hand control. Elec.
and Comm Japan, III. 2001. 84(10):35-46.
[Oskoei and Hu, 2008] Oskoei MA, Hu H. Support vector ma-

following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning.
Machine Learning. 1992. 8(3-4):229-56.

chine-based classification scheme for myoelectric control applied
to upper limb. IEEE Trans. Biomed Eng. 2008. 55(8):1956-65.