Timo Greifenberg, Markus Look, Sebastian Roidl, Bernhard Rumpe
Software Engineering
RWTH Aachen University

Nevertheless a DSL cannot incorporate all additional
information, since it is typically outside of the domain but
required for code generation. To keep a DSL clean, readable
and reusable in diﬀerent contexts, it is useful to deﬁne a
separate tagging language. The drawback of the second
case may be overcome by automated transformations which
are used and successfully applied [5] in Model Driven
Architecture (MDA) [6]. But still each kind of additional
information has to be considered on the model level,
resulting in huge additional eﬀort. In an agile development
process, models are often reused and information may
change frequently, further increasing the cost of adopting
the transformations.
We present our approach for adding additional informa-
tion to existing models via a separate tagging language
without polluting the models and without neccessary model
transformations. A tag model logically adds information
to the tagged DSL model, respectively its model elements,
while technically keeping the artifacts separated. Using a
generic tagging language leads to promiscuous tag models,
whereas deﬁning a target DSL-speciﬁc tag language has a
high initial overhead. To reduce this overhead and to avoid
promiscuous models, we present a systematic approach to
deﬁne a DSL-speciﬁc tag language and a corresponding
schema language, combining the advantages of both worlds.
This pair is called tagging languages.
We formalize the speciﬁcation of additional information
and explicitly model it by using tagging languages ﬁtted
speciﬁcally to the existing modeling language. Additional
data is deﬁned within external tag models, preventing
model pollution. Moreover, data from diﬀerent domains
like persistency conﬁguration, security conﬁguration or
GUI style conﬁguration can be deﬁned in separate tag
models. In this way the corresponding domain experts
are given a model-based possibility to attach additional
information and can work independently from each other
given only the information necessary for their work, thus
focussing completely on their domain. The situation is
even further improved by the second DSL, the tagschema
language, allowing for the deﬁnition of tag types for a
given tag language leading to a type system for tags. Thus,
the domain expert, modelling the additional information
can be eﬃciently supported by tools utilizing tagschema
models to validate corresponding tag models. Additionally
the generator developer is given the possibility to deﬁne
the kinds of additional information the generator is able

Abstract—To
keep
a
DSL
clean,
readable
and
reusable in diﬀerent contexts, it is useful to deﬁne a
separate tagging language. A tag model logically adds
information to the tagged DSL model while technically
keeping the artifacts separated. Using a generic tagging
language leads to promiscuous tag models, whereas
deﬁning a target DSL-speciﬁc tag language has a high
initial overhead. This paper presents a systematic ap-
proach to deﬁne a DSL-speciﬁc tag language and a cor-
responding schema language, combining the advantages
of both worlds: (a) the tag language speciﬁcally ﬁts
to the DSL, (b) the artifacts are kept separated and
enabling reuse with diﬀerent tag decorations, (c) the
tag language follows a deﬁned type schema, and (d)
systematic derivation considerably reduces the eﬀort
necessary to implement the tag language. An example
shows that it can at least partially be realized by
a generator and applied for any kind of DSL. Index
Terms—Software Engineering, Modeling, MDE, GSE

I. Introduction

Model-Driven Software Engineering (MDE) [1] makes
use of models written in domain speciﬁc languages (DSL)
as primary development artifacts. It tries to abstract
from technical conﬁgurations in order to focus on the
application domain itself. Generative Programming [2] uses
those models as input for code generators which in turn
are able to generate most parts of the software system.
Nevertheless, some parts of the software system cannot be
generated from only the domain model. Further adaptations
of the generated system might be needed which can be
done by integration of handwritten code [3] or by using
conﬁgurable generators [4]. For conﬁgurable generators,
the domain model on its own is often not suﬃcient as
input. Additionally, further data, e.g. platform speciﬁc
information needs to be provided.
There are mainly two approaches to provide this addi-
tional data: the domain model is enriched by additional
information or the additional information is stored in
separated artifacts. While the former has the drawback of
polluting the domain model by mixing domain information
with additional data, the latter has the drawback that
diﬀerent artifacts need to be synchronized over time due
to model evolution. Model pollution is especially bad when
models are supposed to be reused within several projects
using diﬀerent generators. Moreover, if diﬀerent technical
aspects must be covered, a lot of additional information is
needed, which easily raises the degree of model pollution.

<<log=timestamp>>
hangUp()

<<monitored>>
Active

Done

dial()

Start

<<log=timestamp>>
hangUp()
send()

<<monitored>>
Busy
[status = isActive]

<<monitored>>
Call
[status = !isActive]

Rating

Fig. 1: A graphical representation of a Statechart that models a method of a Voice over Internet (VoiT) App.

to handle. This is similar to the dynamic features pattern
presented in [7]. By providing the possibility to separate
additional information from each other and from the
domain model, we are able to follow the concept of
separation of concerns [8]. Consistency problems can be
avoided as the speciﬁcation of additional information takes
place at the model level. Thus, tooling can be used to ensure
the consistency between models of all involved languages.
As both of the mentioned DSLs somehow depend on the
existing modeling language, a methodology for creating the
corresponding tagging languages is provided. This supports
the language developer since we assume that by such rules,
the speciﬁc language can be created faster and with better
quality. Therefore the derivation rules have to be kept as
easy as possible. The methodology can be implemented as
a derivation algorithm and generated automatically.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II an
example is introduced. In Section III used techniques
and technologies are introduced. The overall approach is
presented in Section IV. Here, common language parts,
derivation rules for the source language speciﬁc language
parts and necessary context conditions are explained. The
derivation process is applied exemplarily in Section V.
Related work is presented in Section VI before the paper
closes with the conclusion in Section VII.

a graphical syntax. Nevertheless, we use the graphical UML
notation also for visualising UML/P diagrams.
Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of a Statechart
that models a method of a Voice over Internet (VoiT) App.
When the user wants to make a call, the application starts
dialing. If there is currently a call, active the current call
cannot be established because the phone is busy. If the
called person is not busy, the call is established. After
ﬁnishing the established call, the user gets the possibility
to rate the quality of the call. The rating is sent and
the overall method terminates. After a non established
call, the method terminates directly. In case there are
any problems with the current network connection, the
method throws an exception. The modeled SC consists of
states and transitions as top level elements. States have
a name, may contain substates to support hierarchy and
invariants. Transitions connect a source state with a target
state. Furthermore, actions are modeled. Figure 1 does not
contain all elements but a subset necessary to understand
our methodology. A complete overview of all SC elements
is provided in [4], [9], [10]. Every element, even the SC
itself, may also be extended by stereotypes.
The stereotype «monitored» is added to the Active
state and its substates, signalling that certain monitoring
functions should be available in a respective implemen-
tation. The stereotype «log=timestamp» deﬁnes that
every time the transition is active, a timestamp is written
to the log. The state ConnectionProblems serves as
an exception state. Every time an exception occurs, this
state becomes the active state of the SC. This is implicitly
expressed by the stereotype exception, specifying that
there is an implicit transition from every state to the
exception state. The value of the stereotype speciﬁes
the exception type and a message. Due to the limited
expressiveness, this is modeled via a single String separated
by a colon. The deﬁnition of the SC itself is enriched
by a stereotype, as shown in Figure 1, modeling that
the SC is used to specify the behaviour of the method
App.call(). Although the SC is quite small, it shows
the problems of using stereotypes in the modeling process:
The technology agnostic part of the model is polluted
with technology speciﬁc information and thus one of the
key strengths of model driven development, getting an

II. Tagging Statecharts

To illustrate our methodology, we start out with an
example where we tag a Statechart (SC) with additional
information. We use Statecharts as predeﬁned in our
language family UML/P [4], [9], [10]. The UML/P consists
of structural as well as behavioural languages, such as
Classdiagramms (CD), Objectdiagrams (OD), Statecharts
(SC), Sequencediagrams (SD) and a test case language
(TC). The UML/P is close to the UML [11] containing
extensions especially suited for being used in a generative
software engineering context. Most of these extensions
consider the use of the models in combination with a
code generator. Thus, concepts such as underspeciﬁcation,
resolving non-determinism or ﬂattening of SCs are directly
incorporated in the language family. Furthermore, the
syntax of the UML/P is textual, whereas the UML provides

2 statechart Mobile {

2 conforms to loggingschema.StatechartTagSchema;

4
initial state Start;

4 tags StatechartTags for Mobile {

6
state Active {

6
tag Mobile with Method = "App.call()";

7
state Call{

8
within Active {

8
[status=!isActive];

9
tag Call,Busy with Monitored;

9
}

10
state Busy {

10
}

11
[status=isActive];

12
tag Active with Monitored;

12
}

13
}

14
tag ConnectionProblems with

15
state ConnectionProblems;

15
Exception {

16
type = "NetworkException",

17
final state Done;

17
msg = "Problems connecting to the mobile network!";

18
};

19
Start -> Active : dial() ;

19
...

20
...

20 }

21 }

Listing 2: A valid tag model, written in a textual language
enriching the SC shown in Listing 1

Listing 1: Textual UML/P notation of the SC shown in
Figure 1.

1 package loggingschema;

2 tagschema StatechartTagSchema {

easy overview of the domain, is lost. Obviously, this gets
worse when more additional information is required, the
modelled system is more complex or when multiple roles
or concerns are involved. To overcome this problem, the
additional information is externalized into a separate tag
model. Listing 1 conveys the same information as Figure
1 in the textual syntax of the UML/P without additional
information, which is shown in Listing 2 as an external,
textual tag model.
Listing 2 shows a valid tag model, written in a textual
language derived using our proposed methodology. Like
the SCs, each tag model starts with a package declaration
that establishes a namespace, followed by the keyword
conforms to and a reference to a tagschema, shown in
Listing 3. Note that the tagschema also contains a package
delcaration that establishes a namespace and is used to
fully qualify the name of the tagschema. By using the
keyword conforms to, each tag ﬁle declares conformity
to one or more tagschemas, as shown in Listing 2 line 2,
expressing that tags used within the tag model are deﬁned
within the tag schema model. We assume that diﬀerent
technological speciﬁca for a model will lead to diﬀerent sets
of tags, which are free of conﬂict by deﬁnition. Conﬂicting
tags might however be possible but are not handled yet. A
formal speciﬁcation of this relation is given in Section IV,
where we also explain how the name references between
the diﬀerent models are resolved. In the example, the two
substates Busy and Call of the Active state are tagged
with Monitored by navigating into it. Listing 2 contains
the same information, that was modeled as stereotypes in
Figure 1. It should be noted, that we consider four diﬀerent
tag types, which are explained in detail in Section IV-B.
Listing 3 shows the schema for the presented tag model,
which also starts with a package declaration. The schema
contains the four diﬀerent tag types: Monitored that only
consists of a single word as key, Log which may take two
disjoint values, Method that can take an arbitrary String

4
tagtype Monitored for State;

6
tagtype Log:["timestamp"|"callerID"] for Transition;

8
tagtype Method:String for Statechart;

10
tagtype Exception for State {

11
type:String,

12
msg:String;

13
}

14 }

Listing 3: A tagschema, written in a textual language
deﬁning the tag types used in Listing 2.

as value and Exception that has multiple ﬁelds as values.
All these tag types are deﬁned in Listing 3.

III. MontiCore
Our methodology to derive the tagging languages is
based on the modular language workbench MontiCore [12],
[13], a framework for designing textual DSLs. MontiCore
uses context free grammars as input artifacts to generate
lexer, parser, prettyprinter, abstract syntax tree (AST)
classes, runtime components and editor support for DSLs.
Furthermore, it enables context condition checking [10],
symbol table implementations [14], code generation and
mechanisms for integrating handwritten code [3]. Context
conditions are syntactically checkable rules that further
constrain the set of valid instances of a language. In this
paper, we specify context conditions in a mathematical way
to provide conformance rules between models of the derived
languages. For generating code we use Freemarker [15] as
a template language for a model to text transformation.
MontiCore combines concrete and abstract syntax within
a single grammar ﬁle and uses a syntax similar to EBNF.
Within such a grammar that starts with the keyword
grammar followed by its name, productions consisting of
a nonterminal and a right-hand side (RHS) that speciﬁes
attributes and compositions within the AST. As with

IV. Methodology

In this section the process to derive the tagging lan-
guages for a given DSL is introduced. Derivation means
that following a set of given derivation rules leads to
the systematic development of new DSLs. Before the
speciﬁc derivation rules for both languages are presented,
Figure 2 gives an overview about the involved languages,
corresponding models and the relations between them.
Afterwards, languages containing the common production
for the tagging languages are introduced. The process for
deriving domain speciﬁc tagging languages is shown. It is
based on MontiCore as the existing modeling language, and
both derived tagging languages are deﬁned as MontiCore
grammars. To ensure the consistency between all models,
context conditions are presented. The language application
section describes involved roles and activities needed to
create tagging models.
The diﬀerent languages involved are shown in the
lower part of the ﬁgure. The MontiCore Grammar (MCG)
ﬂag on the right indicates that the languages are de-

A. The LT ag
COMMON Language

Listing 4 shows the MontiCore grammar of LT ag
COMMON.
The LT ag
COMMON language serves as a basis of LT ag
G
. It
deﬁnes the overall structure of all tag models. The Tag-
Model production marks the beginning of a tag model.
First a comma separated list of QualifiedName can be
speciﬁed in order to reference corresponding tagschemas,
explained in Section IV-B. A tag model then starts with the
keyword tags, followed by a QualifiedName referencing
the actual target model whose information is tagged.
The grammar provides two major concepts and the
interface ModelElementIdentifier that has to be
implemented in sublanguages. The ﬁrst concept is the
concept of Contexts that enable navigating into elements,
via the within construct. As shown in Listing 4, the
Context production uses the ModelElementIdenti-
fier interface to address elements. Other contexts may be

references



model of

model of

references
elements of

model of

MCG
«derived»





«derived»



builds on
builds on

depends on
builds on

«predefined»



«predefined»





«existing»


Fig. 2: Overview of involved languages, corresponding models and the relations between them.

IV-C and V.
The interface Tag is directly implemented within
LT ag
COMMON by three diﬀerent productions. The Simple-
Tag consists only of its name in order to ﬂag an element
of the target model with additional information. The
ValuedTag tag consists of a name and an additional
value. This value is always represented as a String in
LT ag
COMMON but, in combination with the corresponding
tagschema, it can be another data type (such as numbers)
as well. This is explained in Section IV-B
The ComplexTag tag allows to express complex informa-
tion with multiple subtags. The name of the tag is followed
by the nested tag block (enclosed in curly brackets), which
consists of a comma separated list of subtags.

1 grammar Tags extends Common{

3
TagModel =

4
"conforms" "to"

5
QualifiedName ("," QualifiedName)*";"

6
"tags" Name "for" targetModel:QualifiedName

7
"{" (contexts:Context | tags:TargetElement)* "}"

8
;

10
Context = "within" ModelElementIdentifier "{"

11
(contexts:Context | tags:TargetElement)*
12
"}"

13
;

15
interface ModelElementIdentifier;

17
DefaultIdent implements ModelElementIdentifier =

18
QualifiedName

19
;

21
interface Tag;

B. The LSchema
COMMON Language
Beneath the common language LT ag
COMMON we also
created a common language to be used by language speciﬁc
tagschema languages, called LSchema
COMMON. The language
LSchema
COMMON, shown in Listing 5, follows the same notion
as LT ag
COMMON. Within the common language again, all
necessary structuring productions and an interface that
has to be implemented by the sublanguages is already
deﬁned. The tagschema language starts with the keyword
tagschema followed by a name. This name is the identiﬁer
that has to be used in the conforms to element of the tag
model, shown in the previous section, in order to reference
the tagschema model.
Within the tagschema model, multiple TagTypes can
be speciﬁed. Each tag type may be private, meaning that
this type can only be used within other tag types and
not as a ﬁrst level type. In general, each TagType starts
with the keyword tagtype, has a Name, that is unique
within a schema, and has a ScopeIdentifier. The scope
references nonterminals of LG. Since the scope is language
speciﬁc, it is represented by an interface in LSchema
COMMON and
has to be implemented in LSchema
G
, where the diﬀerent
scopes are known.
The interface TagType is implemented by four spe-
ciﬁc kinds of types: SimpleTagType, ValuedTag-
Type, EnumeratedTagType, and ComplexTagType. A

23
TargetElement =

24
"tag" ModelElementIdentifier

25
("," ModelElementIdentifier)*
26
"with" Tag ("," Tag)* ";"

27
;

29
SimpleTag implements Tag = Name;

31
ValuedTag implements Tag = Name "=" String;

33
ComplexTag implements Tag = Name

34
"{" (Tag ("," Tag)* ";")? "}"

35
;

36 }

Listing 4: The LT ag
COMMON MontiCore grammar.

nested within in order to navigate further into the hierarchy
or tags for speciﬁc elements. The second concept is the
TargetElement production, deﬁning the tagging of a
speciﬁc element. It starts with the keyword tag followed by
a comma separated list of ModelElementIdentifier.
After that a with follows and then the actual tagged
information represented by the interface Tag. The list
of ModelElementIdentifier enables simultaneously
tagging of multiple elements. The interface itself is im-
plemented in sublanguages for the purpose of uniquely
identifying concrete elements of MLG. The derivation and
implementation of the sublanguages is shown in Sections

3
TagSchema = "tagschema" Name

4
"{"

5
TagType*
6
"}"

7
;

C. LT ag
G
Derivation Process

9
interface TagType;

To derive a LT ag
G
for a given source language LG, we
utilize the inheritance mechanism of MontiCore. In this
way, production rules of LT ag
COMMON and LG can be reused
and additional rules can be speciﬁed.

11
interface ScopeIdentifier;

13
Scope = "for"

14
(ScopeIdentifier ("," ScopeIdentifier)* | "*")

15
;

17
SimpleTagType implements TagType =

18
["private"]? "tagtype" Name Scope? ";"

Addressing Elements: As it is possible to tag elements
that are nested within others (e.g. nested states), there
are two diﬀerent ways to address those elements. The
ﬁrst possibility is to use a dot-separated syntax (e.g.
Active.Call) but this technique may get tedious when
trying to tag multiple elements or if the elements are
nested deeper. The second possibility is the use of contexts.
A context consists of the keyword within followed by
an identiﬁer and its body (enclosed in curly brackets,
cf. Listing 2, l.8). XPath like path deﬁnitions have been
eliminated, since they are too unstable against changes in
the models. XQuery is more for tagging sets of elements,
where we use transformations. The identiﬁer refers to a
target element, which is used as a context to resolve all
other elements that are deﬁned within the body of the
context.
In general, the resulting tag language should be able to
address all elements speciﬁed by models of LG. The type
of those elements is given by the nonterminals N ∈LG in
the source language grammar. To facilitate the derivation,
the LT ag
COMMON oﬀers the ModelElementIdentifier
(cf. Listing 4, l.15) interface that has to be implemented by
the productions of the sublanguage LT ag
G
. By implementing
this interface, elements of MLG become identiﬁable and
can be referenced by MLT ag
G
. To address those elements,
one of the following rules have to be applied:

19
;

21
EnumeratedTagType implements TagType =

22
["private"]? "tagtype" Name ":"

23
"[" String ("|" String)* "]" Scope? ";"

24
;

26
ValuedTagType implements TagType =

27
["private"]? "tagtype" Name ":"

28
("int"|"String"|"Boolean") Scope? ";"

29
;

31
ComplexTagType implements TagType =

32
["private"]? "tagtype" Scope?

33
"{" Reference ("," Reference)* ";" "}"

34
;

36
Reference = Name ":" ReferenceTyp ("?"|"+"|"*")? ;

38
ReferenceTyp = ("int"|"String"|"Boolean"|Name);

39 }

Listing 5: The LSchema
COMMON MontiCore grammar.

SimpleTagType deﬁnes a tag type which solely consists
of a key as a simple, static ﬂag. In MLT ag
G
such tag
types are expressed as a SimpleTag. A ValuedTagType
contains a value which can be of a deﬁned type, such
as int, String or Boolean. In MLT ag
G
such tag types
are expressed as a ValuedTag with a String value. The
type checking is ensured via context conditions, explained
in Section IV-E. An EnumeratedTagType deﬁnes a set
of values that compose the domain of that tag type. An
instance of an enumerated tag type, modeled in MLT ag
G
is
also expressed as a ValuedTag and must additionally
declare a value that exists in the deﬁned domain. Thus,
the enumerated tag type is restricted in its values, whereas
the valued tag type is more expressive and only restricted
by its native type. A ComplexTagType has the most
expressive power as it can deﬁne an arbitrary number of
subtag types. Such subtag types are again directly deﬁned
or referenced tag types, nested within the complex tag
type. A reference has a unique name within the complex
tag type, and a certain type. The type may either be a
primitive data type, analogously to the ValuedTagType,
or a reference to another tag type already deﬁned in the
schema. Hence it is possible to nest information of various
tag types into one complex tag and there is no limitation
on the depth of the hierarchy.

IV-C.1. Let N ∈LG be the set of nonterminals of LG.
For every n ∈N that can be identiﬁed by a qualiﬁed name,
the DefaultIdent rule of LT ag
COMMON can be reused (cf.
Listing 4, l.17).

IV-C.2. For every other nonterminal n ∈N, a manual
identiﬁer has to be chosen, that uniquely identiﬁes the
element. This is dependent on the semantics and the
use of the language. A general possibility to ensure a
correct identiﬁcation rule is to reuse the concrete syntax
of the tagged element in the tagging language. Therefore,
a new rule In is added to LT ag
G
where the nonterminal of
LG enclosed in brackets is used to address corresponding
elements:

In implements ModelElementIdentifier = "[" n "]"

Nevertheless, reusing the concrete syntax of the tagged
element typically leads to a poor concrete syntax of the

Figure 2 already gave an insight into the relations
between models of the diﬀerent modeling languages.
These relations where bounded to the technical relations
references and references elements of. In fact,
the relations between the models are more complex and
the conformance of models among each other have to be
validated by additional rules in contrast to the consistency
between all involved languages where no additional context
conditions are required, since they are ensured by construc-
tion through the derivation rules. The following context
conditions are used to consistency check the tag model as
well as the tag schema model.
Before introducing these context conditions, some vari-
ables are deﬁned: Let st ∈MLT ag
G
be a tag deﬁning
statement of MLT ag
G
, MRst the set of model element
references of st, TRst the set of tag type references of
st, tr.value : tr ∈TRst the value, either native, enum
or complex, assigned to a tag, Dom(tr.value) the type,
either speciﬁc native, enum or complex, of the value,
tt ∈MLSchema
G
a tag type deﬁning statement of MLSchema
G
,
tt.name the name of the deﬁned tag type, tt.domain the
type of the value which can be assigned to this tag type,
and MTRtt the set of model element type references of tt
deﬁned in LG.

D. LSchema
G
Derivation Process

To derive LSchema
G
for a given source language LG, the
inheritance mechanism of MontiCore is utilized again. In
this way, production rules of LSchema
COMMON can be reused
and additional rules can be speciﬁed. In contrast to
LT ag
G
and LG, there is no inheritance relation between
LSchema
G
and LG. Nevertheless, LSchema
G
depends on LG as
parts of the concrete syntax are reused for the deﬁnition
of LSchema
G
(instead of referencing existing rules).

Addressing Element Types: In addition to the rules of
LSchema
COMMON, derivation rules to address element types of
MLG must be added to LSchema
G
. This is necessary as the
tagschema language is used to deﬁne which tags can be
added to which type of elements. To facilitate the derivation
the LSchema
COMMON oﬀers the ScopeIdentifier (cf. Listing
5, l.11) interface that has to be implemented by the
productions of the sublanguage LSchema
G
. By implementing
this interface, elements of LG become identiﬁable and can
be referenced by MLSchema
G
. The fact that each type of an
element is deﬁned by a nonterminal of the corresponding
MontiCore grammar is used to deﬁne the derivation rule
for LSchema
G
:

Tagged elements: A relation between MLT ag
G
and MLG is
explicitly stated within the MLT ag
G
(cf. Listing 2, l.4). The
correctness of this relation is given if each tagged element
of MLT ag
G
exists in MLG.

IV-D.1. Let N ∈LG be the set of nonterminals of LG.
For every n ∈N a new rule SIn is added to LSchema
G
:

SIn implements ScopeIdentifier = "n";

IV-E.1. For each st ∈MLT ag
G
, mr ∈MRst:

Addressing Nested Element Types: We need to con-
sider that nonterminals of LG might be used more than once
on the RHS of a production, e.g. "source:Name ’->’
target:Name", taken from the SC grammar, where the
nonterminal Name is used twice. Within MontiCore, such
occurrences of nonterminals are distinguished by identiﬁers
preceding the nonterminal. As we need to address each
occurrence in LSchema
G
, we add additional production rules
implementing the ScopeIdentifier interface, which
utilize the preceding identiﬁers of nonterminals of LG.

mr ∈MLG

Conforms to: The conforms to relation between a
MLT ag
G
model and a corresponding MLSchema
G
model is also
stated explicitly (cf. Listing 2, l.2). The correctness of this
relation is given if for every tag statement in the MLT ag
G
a
corresponding tag type is deﬁned in MLSchema
G
.

IV-E.2. Each tag type of MLSchema
G
has a unique name
which allows the unique mapping between used tag types
within statements of MLT ag
G
and the tag type deﬁnition
statements of MLSchema
G
. For tt1, tt2 ∈MLSchema
G
:

IV-D.2. Let PIst be the set of preceding identiﬁers that
occur more than once on the RHS of a single production
st ∈LG. For each preceding identiﬁer pi ∈PIst for all st,
a speciﬁc production rule SIpi is added to LSchema
G
in order
to address the diﬀerent occurrences in the scope st deﬁning
nonterminal n:

tt1.name = tt2.name ⇒tt1 = tt2

If multiple schemas are referenced by MLT ag
G
, the rule
has to be extended to ensure unique names for all included
tag types of all referenced tagschemas.

SIpi implements ScopeIdentifier = "n_pi";

IV-E.3. For each tag type reference of each statement of
MLT ag
G
, a corresponding tag type exists (1). Furthermore,
the model element types of tagged elements ﬁt to the types
deﬁned in MLSchema
G
(2) and the types of tag values ﬁt to

Note that all identiﬁers are unique within a single
production even if they are used to distinguish diﬀerent
nonterminals on the RHS. If the identifer is unique in the
scope of all st ∈LG, the preﬁx n_ can be omitted.

interface Element;
Transition implements Element =
source:Name "->" target:Name ( (":" TransitionBody) | ";" );

tt = tr
(1)

∧
{mr.type | mr ∈MRst} ⊆MTRtt
(2)

State implements Element =
Stereotype? "state" Name "{"
( Stereotype? "[" Invariant "]" )?
"}";
-
}

derivation

∧
Dom(tr.value) = tt.domain
(3)

grammar StatechartTagDefinition extends CommonTagDefinition, Statechart {

derivation

Note that the comparison of tag value types (3) must
support native types, enum types and complex types.

TransitionIdentifier implements ModelElementIdentifier= "[" Transition "]";
InvariantIdentifier implements ModelElementIdentifier = "[" Invariant "]";
}

IV-C.2

F. Language Application in MDE
So far, a methodology for deriving the tagging languages
for a given source language has been presented. In this
paragraph the application of both languages in a MDE
environment is examined. For simplicity, it is assumed
that a single generator is involved in the MDE process
which takes MLG models together with corresponding
MLT ag
G
models as input.
Before the generator can be used, the generator has
to be developed by the generator developer. Beside the
usual generator development steps, the generator devel-
oper models MLSchema
G
and provides the model as part
of the generator. The generator is developed in a way
that multiple MLT ag
G
conforming to the MLSchema
G
can be
processed. The generator user is the role that creates the
inputs for the generator, which are the domain model
MLG and in addition a model MLT ag
G
for the additional,
e.g. domain speciﬁc, information. Of course this role can
be taken by more than one person, most likely an expert
for each domain, such as a domain expert and a database
designer who tags the domain model with database speciﬁc
conﬁguration information.
In a more complex scenario, several MLSchema
G
can be
provided by the generator developer. This implies that the
generator must be able to process multiple MLT ag
G
conform-
ing to any of the MLSchema
G
. This enables a clean model-
based speciﬁcation of all necessary additional information
not in the scope of the domain. Note that in this complex
scenario, the languages LSchema
G
and LT ag
G
must not be
adapted concerning the simpler scenario.

grammar StatechartTagSchema extends CommonTagSchema {

SCSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "SCDefinition";
TransitionSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "Transition";
StateSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "State";
InvariantSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "Invariant";

IV-D.1

SourceSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "Transition_Source";
TargetSchemaIdentifier implements ScopeIdentifier = "Transition_Target";
}

IV-D.2

Fig. 3: Application of the tagging languages derivation rules for
the SC grammar.

LSchema
COMMON languages also inherited from. Furthermore,
the SC grammar consists of the nonterminals SCDefi-
nition, Transition, TransitionBody, State and
Invariant. The Element interface and the Transi-
tionBody are omitted within the derivation process.
For the other nonterminals, the derivation process for
deriving LT ag
G
is shown in Figure 3 and the necessary
steps are applied. Implicitly, every SCDefinition and
every State can be identiﬁed by a unique name. Thus,
the default production for ModelElementIdentifier
deﬁned in LT ag
COMMON, following step IV-C.1, is used. For
the remaining two nonterminals, the derivation rule IV-
C.2 that reuses the abstract syntax of LG is applied, as
shown in Figure 3. The two nested source and target
variables are also directly identiﬁable by a name and
therefore can be tagged via the transition identiﬁer and
the respective source or target name. An instance of
this derived language was already shown in Listing 2.
The names of the SC and the states have been used for
identifying the elements. The presented model can be
parsed with the parser generated by MontiCore out of
the derived language. The complete SC language consists
of 16 diﬀerent productions and six nested nonterminals
that have to be distinguished by a variable name. Six
nonterminals are not uniquely identiﬁable by a name.
Thus, the derived tag language includes six productions to
specify these identiﬁers. For Classdiagrams the situation
is similar: The grammar contains 17 productions with
10 nested nonterminals that have to be distinguished by
a variable name and the derived tag language contains
ﬁve productions. The grammar for MontiCore grammars
presents itself a bit diﬀerent since we chose to tag only
certain elements, i.e. the grammar itself and productions.
Thus, the corresponding tag language contains only two
productions.
The derivation of LSchema
G
is shown in Figure 3. We
again apply the derivation rules and use the name of the

V. Case Study
In order to validate our approach, we applied it to three
diﬀerent languages: SCs, CDs and directly to MontiCore
grammars. The case study is used to evaluate if the method
itself is applicable to a set of languages and to get an
impression on the beneﬁts for the diﬀerent roles. It does
not provide a solid empirical study. Apart from the sole
applicability, we check if creating the tagging language can
be done with small eﬀort. Additionally, we check if we can
check the tag models against the schema, i.e. we are able to
deﬁne constraints on the target element types and on the
structure of tags in general. Furthermore, the possibility
of creating multiple models was explored.
Figure 3 shows the application to an excerpt of the
SC grammar. The SC grammar also inherits some nonter-
minals from the Common language, the LT ag
COMMON and

VI. Related Work

Similar to the approach of [18], the LT ag
G
language can
be automatically derived from the target grammar G by
using the concrete syntax of the target element type as its
identiﬁer. In our work we recommend to manually choose a
readable identiﬁer and provide a default derivation rule for
systematic derivation. In [18] the default rules are generated
and can be overridden afterwards by a language extension.
An alternative approach where variability is added to DSLs
is presented in [19].
Related is the ProMoBox approach [20], that generates
ﬁve diﬀerent sublanguages out of a given metamodel of a
DSL. These languages are used to specify certain aspects
of the system, such as design, input, output, runtime and
properties. This approach diﬀers in the fact that the tags in
our case are used for a diﬀerent purpose, such as enriching
the model with arbitrary information. Other approaches
aim at reducing the complexity of a model using multilevel
modelling approaches [7], [21].
In [22] three primary methods for deﬁning a DSL are
presented. Two of those extend or reﬁne an existing
modeling language. The source language is the UML
[23] whose extension techniques can be compared to our
approach as we build upon a source language as well. The
ﬁrst mechanism is to add stereotypes to elements of the
source language which enables specialized DSL tools to
display the marked elements in a diﬀerent way. This is
similar to our approach which tags special elements of the
source language. However, in our approach models of the
source language do not need to be changed. Thus, we avoid

VII. Conclusion

In the presented work a methodology for deriving a
language speciﬁc pair of tagging languages has been intro-
duced. Built upon two common parent languages, the eﬀort
for creating the language speciﬁc parts could be minimized.
Beside the systematic stepwise derivation process, necessary
context conditions for ensuring consistency and validity of
the models have been presented. Moreover, advices for the
application of the tagging languages have been given and
a case study ensuring the feasibility of the approach has
been presented. For future work we aim at implementing
our methodology in an automated language generation
process, that makes use of reasonable defaults and is able
to generate both languages directly from a given grammar.
Furthermore, the generation of corresponding context con-
ditions is planned which will allow the automatic validation
of corresponding tag and tagschema models. Additionally
we aim at exploring conﬂict resolution strategies for tags
and the possiblity to tag tags themselves. As additional
tool support, the generation of a tagschema model editor
from source grammars and the generation of tag model
editors from corresponding tagschema models is planned.
Moreover, back-end infrastructure for the generator could
be generated to make processing of tag models easy.

References

[1] H. Grönniger, “Systemmodell-basierte Deﬁnition objektbasierter
Modellierungssprachen mit semantischen Variationspunkten,”
Ph.D. dissertation, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Deutschland, 2010.
[2] K. Czarnecki and U. W. Eisenecker, Generative Programming:
Methods, Tools, and Applications.
Addison-Wesley, 2000.
[3] T. Greifenberg, K. Hoelldobler, C. Kolassa, M. Look, P. Mir
Seyed Nazari, K. Mueller, A. Navarro Perez, D. Plotnikov,
D. Reiss, A. Roth, B. Rumpe, M. Schindler, and A. Wortmann,
“A Comparison of Mechanisms for Integrating Handwritten and
Generated Code for Object-Oriented Programming Languages,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Model-
Driven Engineering and Software Development.
Angers, France:
SciTePress, 9-11 February 2015.
[4] B. Rumpe, Agile Modellierung mit UML : Codegenerierung,
Testfälle, Refactoring, 2nd ed.
Springer Berlin, September
2012.
[5] Object
Management
Group,
“MDA
Success
Stories,”

[6] ——, “Model Driven Architecture (MDA) MDA Guide rev. 2.0,”
August 2014,
[7] J. D. Lara, E. Guerra, and J. S. Cuadrado, “When and how to
use multilevel modelling,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 12:1–12:46, 2014.
[8] E. W. Dijkstra, A discipline of programming.
Upper Saddle
River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1976.
[9] B. Rumpe, Modellierung mit UML, 2nd ed.
Springer Berlin,
September 2011.
[10] M. Schindler, Eine Werkzeuginfrastruktur zur agilen Entwicklung
mit der UML/P, ser. Aachener Informatik-Berichte, Software
Engineering, Band 11.
Shaker, 2012.
[11] M. Fowler, UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object
Modeling Language, 3rd ed.
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley
Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2003.
[12] H. Krahn, MontiCore: Agile Entwicklung von domänenspe-
ziﬁschen Sprachen im Software-Engineering, ser. Aachener
Informatik-Berichte, Software Engineering. Shaker Verlag, März
2010, no. 1.
[13] H. Krahn, B. Rumpe, and S. Völkel, “MontiCore: a framework
for compositional development of domain speciﬁc languages,”
STTT, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 353–372, 2010.
[14] S. Völkel, Kompositionale Entwicklung domänenspeziﬁscher
Sprachen, ser. Aachener Informatik-Berichte, Software Engineer-
ing.
Shaker Verlag, 2011, no. 9.
[15] Freemarker website
[16] A. Haber, M. Look, P. Mir Seyed Nazari, A. Navarro Perez,
B. Rumpe, S. Voelkel, and A. Wortmann, “Integration of Het-
erogeneous Modeling Languages via Extensible and Composable
Language Components,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Model-Driven Engineering and Software Develop-
ment.
Angers, France: SciTePress, 9-11 February 2015.
[17] M. Look, A. Navarro Pérez, J. O. Ringert, B. Rumpe, and
A. Wortmann, “Black-box Integration of Heterogeneous Model-
ing Languages for Cyber-Physical Systems,” in Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on the Globalization of Modeling Languages,
B. Combemale, J. De Antoni, and R. B. France, Eds., vol. 1102,
Miami, Florida, USA, 2013.
[18] A. Haber, K. Hölldobler, C. Kolassa, M. Look, B. Rumpe,
K. Müller, and I. Schaefer, “Engineering Delta Modeling Lan-
guages,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Software Product Lines, Tokyo, Japan, 2013, no. September.
New York: ACM Press, 2013, pp. 22–31.