Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning with
Simultaneous Human Control and Feedback

Kory W. Mathewson 1 Patrick M. Pilarski 2

Abstract

This paper contributes a ﬁrst study into how dif-
ferent human users deliver simultaneous control
and feedback signals during human-robot inter-
action. As part of this work, we formalize and
present a general interactive learning framework
for online cooperation between humans and re-
inforcement learning agents.
In many human-
machine interaction settings, there is a growing
gap between the degrees-of-freedom of complex
semi-autonomous systems and the number of hu-
man control channels.
Simple human control
and feedback mechanisms are required to close
this gap and allow for better collaboration be-
tween humans and machines on complex tasks.
To better inform the design of concurrent con-
trol and feedback interfaces, we present experi-
mental results from a human-robot collaborative
domain wherein the human must simultaneously
deliver both control and feedback signals to inter-
actively train an actor-critic reinforcement learn-
ing robot. We compare three experimental con-
ditions: 1) human delivered control signals, 2)
reward-shaping feedback signals, and 3) simulta-
neous control and feedback. Our results suggest
that subjects provide less feedback when simul-
taneously delivering feedback and control sig-
nals and that control signal quality is not signif-
icantly diminished. Our data suggest that sub-
jects may also modify when and how they pro-
vide feedback.
Through algorithmic develop-
ment and tuning informed by this study, we ex-
pect semi-autonomous actions of robotic agents
can be better shaped by human feedback, allow-
ing for seamless collaboration and improved per-
formance in difﬁcult interactive domains.

arXiv:1703.01274v2 [cs.AI] 15 Mar 2017

Figure 1. Experimental conﬁguration. One of the study partic-
ipants with the Myo band on their right arm providing a con-
trol signal, while simultaneously providing feedback signals with
their left hand. The Aldebaran Nao robot simulation is visible on
the screen alongside experimental logging.

1. Introduction

Interactive machine learning (IML) is the ﬁeld of comput-
ing science exploring how intelligent agents solve tasks to-
gether. Complex tasks of the future will demand adaptive
collaboration at the interface between human and machine
intelligences over the course of sequential decision-making
problems.
These problem domains span many complex
tasks: from search and recommendations systems to social
media personalization and safety, from interactive dialogue
systems to embodied agents, and from autonomous vehi-
cles to prosthetic robots.

In this work we focus on IML in the setting of human-
machine interfaces (HMI) where the human and the ma-
chine interact closely and frequently with each other, e.g.,
a human interacting with a robotic artiﬁcial limb. Tightly
coupled HMI of this kind have become increasingly com-
plex in form and function, and, in critical domains such as
prosthetics, control remains a serious challenge for users
(Castellini et al., 2014). Advances in engineering have re-
sulted in an increasing number of controllable actuators and

1University of Alberta, Dep. of Computing Science, Edmon-
ton, Canada 2University of Alberta, Deps. of Medicine and Com-
puting Science, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Correspondence to:
Kory Mathewson

Under review for the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, 2017. JMLR: W&CP. Copyright
2017 by the authors.

mizing expected return, the cumulative future reward sig-
nal received by the agent (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The con-
trol policy of the agent is iteratively improved by selecting
actions which maximize return. RL problems are often de-
scribed as sequential decision making problems modelled
as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) which deﬁne tu-
ples: (State, Action, Transitions, γ, Reward), full de-
tails of MDPs are omitted for space and can be found in
(Sutton & Barto, 1998). The ultimate goal of an RL agent
is to determine a policy which maps a given current state
to the correct actions to maximize expected return. In this
work we use a continuous actor-critic (AC) algorithm (Al-
gorithm 1) similar to that described in (Pilarski et al., 2011;
2013; Mathewson & Pilarski, 2016; 2017). AC methods
work to reduce variance in gradient estimation through the
use of two learning systems: a policy-focused actor (selects
the best action) and a critic (estimate of value function, crit-
icizes actor) (Sutton & Barto, 1998).

a resulting chasm between these actuators and the limited
number of clean, reproducible control signals from a user.

One ﬂexible way to manage the growing disparity between
available control options and accessible human control sig-
nals is to transfer partial autonomy to machine learning
agents.
IML research to date has investigated how au-
tonomous agents can learn to solve problems effectively
through interactions with humans (Argall et al., 2009;
Knox & Stone, 2009; Fails & Olsen Jr, 2003).
Seam-
less communication between autonomous agents and hu-
mans demands two-way communication and understand-
ing. Past IML research has therefore explored techniques
ranging from human demonstrations, to human-robotic
control sharing and humans delivering feedback (Argall
et al., 2009; Knox & Stone, 2015; Fails & Olsen Jr, 2003).

In this paper we focus speciﬁcally on humans interacting
with reinforcement learning (RL) systems (Thomaz et al.,
2005; Knox & Stone, 2015). Of note, Actor-Critic Rein-
forcement Learning (ACRL) is a family of RL algorithms
which have shown promise in past studies as a way for hu-
mans and autonomous agents to collaborate in tightly cou-
pled HMI like prosthetic limbs and other robots (Pilarski
et al., 2013; 2011).

The Interactive Shaping Problem (ISP) deﬁnes the problem
of optimizing the incorporation of human feedback into
a learning agent in a sequential decision making problem
(Knox & Stone, 2010). The ISP asks: how can the agent
learn the best possible task policy, as measured by task per-
formance or cumulative human feedback, given the infor-
mation contained in the human responses (Knox & Stone,
2009; 2012). While there are many ways to incorporate
human knowledge into a learning system both before and
during learning (Thomaz & Breazeal, 2008; Chernova &
Thomaz, 2014; Argall et al., 2009; Knox & Stone, 2015;
Fails & Olsen Jr, 2003), this paper focuses on incorporating
human feedback directly alongside MDP derived reward in
an RL problem.

While studies with IML have explored in detail the ways
in which humans deliver feedback to a machine learner
(Thomaz & Breazeal, 2008; Knox & Stone, 2015), it re-
mains unclear to what degree humans are able to provide
both feedback and primary control signals to a machine
partner. It is also unclear what interactions exist between a
human providing tightly coupled direct control signals and
high frequency reward and punishment signals to a learn-
ing robotic system. Simultaneous control and feedback is
a novel, unexplored domain with many unanswered ques-
tions in the space of human-RL interaction, speciﬁcally
when multi-model signals must be interpreted by the learn-
ing system.

This work builds on the work of Vien and Ertel, who
showed that the human feedback model can be generalized
to address the problems associated with periods of noisy
and inconsistent human feedback (2013). Recent advance-
ments in modelling human feedback with a Bayesian ap-
proach have improved on these foundations in discrete en-
vironments (Loftin et al., 2016a). Most recently, work by
Macglashan et al. show that human feedback may be better
modelled as an advantage function to handle changes in a
feedback strategy over time (Macglashan et al., 2016) and
that these techniques may be extended to the policy space
(MacGlashan et al., 2017).

This paper therefore contributes the ﬁrst study into simulta-
neous human control and feedback during the training of an
ACRL algorithm. To support this study, we present a Gen-
eral Interactive Learning Framework (Fig. 4) within which
these problems can be easily described and formalized. We
then present results from a user study (N=13) on a well-
deﬁned testbed for experimentation in the space of IML
for humans and RL algorithms with control and feedback.
Finally, we conclude by discussing open questions and pro-
pose several future research topics in interactive RL.

The experimental conﬁguration in this study is similar to
that described in similar related work (Pilarski et al., 2011;
Mathewson & Pilarski, 2016). This study provides novel
results for N = 13 different human trainers, and robust
comparison with simulated baselines. We explore the im-
plications of varying the conditions of the user providing
control signals, feedback signals, and simultaneous control
and feedback signals. To characterize the many latent vari-

2. Background

RL is a learning framework inspired by behaviorism (Skin-
ner, 1938) which describes how agents improve over time
by taking actions in an environment with a goal of maxi-

Figure 2. General Interactive Learning Framework. This diagram shows the interactions between the prepared human and the agent
(learning system) during task performance. The system is composed of three dense communication channels: F : feedback signal from
the human, processed by Feedback Interface, S: state signal from the human processed by State Interface, D: display signals from
agent action information and environmental state information processed by a Display to the perception of the human; several signals
from the human: h: real-valued human signals delivered to agent, ah: human actions which may impact interactive components of the
agent or environment directly, sh: human state signals delivers to agent; two meta-information signals: a+: information about action
taken by learning agent, and s+: information about the new state of the environment; and the basic RL diagram (denoted in the red
dashed box): a: action performed by agent in environment, s: state of the environment, delivered to the agent, and r: reward delivered
by the environment to the agent

3. Methods

ables in human feedback and control we also compare these
results with simulated human trials. Speciﬁcally, we inves-
tigate the effects of providing control on feedback, and the
effects of providing feedback on control.

3.1. Experimental conﬁguration: Aldebaran Nao and
Myo Electromyography (EMG) Data

The experimental set up is shown in Fig. 1. If this conﬁg-
uration is compared to Fig. 2, then it is straightforward
how the component pieces ﬁt together.
It is composed
of a human subject interacting with an agent, in this case
the Aldebaran Nao robotic simulation platform (Aldebaran
Robotics). The human provides control signals through a
state interface, in this case a wireless 8-channel Myo elec-
tromyography (EMG) armband (Thalmic Labs), and deliv-
ers feedback on the feedback interface (keyboard) which
is connected to the learning system, here a MacBook Air
(Apple, 2.2 GHz Intel Core i7, 8GB RAM). The system
provides the user a view of the simulated robot and logs
data for future analysis. All experiments in this paper are
performed using a simulated Nao platform. The perfor-
mance of this experimental set-up to be comparable, albeit
with less environmental noise, to simulation and real-world
experiments (Mathewson & Pilarski, 2016).

2.1. General Interactive Learning Framework

Fig. 2 details a General Interactive Learning Framework.
The system is composed of the classic RL learning dia-
gram (Sutton & Barto, 1998). This is seen in the dotted
red box surrounding the agent, environment, as well as the
lines for action a, state s, and reward r. Both the agent and
the environment have interactive components which the hu-
man may affect directly through ah. The human may take
actions which affect the dense feedback channel F or the
dense state signal S. The human perceives the dense dis-
play signal D, this display may take many different forms
including but not limited to visual perception of a screen.

The Feedback Interface serves as a ﬁlter through which
the humans feedback actions are translated to a real-valued
human-based signal h, and similarly the State Interface
translates human state signals into state information to the
agent, sh.
Finally, the agent delivers meta-information
about the action that is taking, which may not be visible
by the environment, in a+, and the environment may be
observed directly by the human through meta-state infor-
mation in s+. The framework offers a formalization for
experimentation in interactive RL problem domains.

For this study, we investigate three experimental human
conditions: 1) providing control signals, 2) providing feed-
back signals and 3) providing simultaneous control and
feedback signals. We include simulated control and feed-
back runs for comparison. The order of the experimen-
tal conditions was randomized by participant to control for
any potential training effects on both the EMG control sig-
nal and/or reward and punishment feedback signals. By
comparing our experimental conditions with two simulated
conditions: simulating human feedback and control and
simulating strictly control signals, we are able to charac-

Algorithm 1 Continuous-Action ACRL

terize and vary important latent variables hidden from the
agent which impact the learning of the system.

initialize: wµ, wσ, v, eµ, eσ, ev, s
repeat

We report the results of asymptotic, convergent task perfor-
mance, EMG control signal error when compared to ideal
EMG control signal, reward timing (when in the robotic
trajectory the user is providing feedback), and total feed-
back counts (both rewards and punishments). These out-
come measures allow for comparison between experimen-
tal conditions, and will help to model and simulate the hu-
man in future work.

µ ←wT
µ x(s)
σ ←exp[wT
σ x(s)]
a ←N(µ, σ2)
take action a, observe r, s′

δ ←r + γvT x(s′) −vT x(s)
ev ←min[1, λvγev + x(s)]
v ←v + αvδev
eµ ←λweµ + (a −µ)x(s)
wµ ←wµ + αµδeµ
eσ ←λweσ + [(a −µ)2 −σ2]x(s)
wσ ←wσ + ασδeσ
s ←s′

3.2. Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning

In this work we use a continuous actor-critic (AC) algo-
rithm (Algorithm 1) similar to that described in prior work
(Pilarski et al., 2011; 2013; Mathewson & Pilarski, 2016;
2017). AC methods can reduce variance in gradient esti-
mation through the use of two learning systems: a policy-
focused actor (selects the best action) and a critic (estimate
of value function, criticizes actor) (Sutton & Barto, 1998).

until termination criteria is met

4. Experiments

We present the ﬁrst user study (N=13) of human-robotic in-
teraction where the human simultaneously delivered both
control and feedback signals. Our experimental conﬁgu-
ration is similar to that of Mathewson & Pilarski (2016;
2017). We aim to compare the conditions of a human pro-
viding control signals, feedback signals, and both control
and feedback signals. By exploring the effects of actual hu-
man trainers providing simultaneous control and feedback
signals to the RL system during the performance of a self-
mirrored movement control task we can properly elucidate
differences between the conditions.

Actor-critic algorithms are a subset of policy gradient based
algorithms. In these algorithms, the control policy π(a|s)
is a function which deﬁnes the probability with which the
system will select an action a in a state s. π is charac-
terized by a vector of parameters wϵRnwhich we assume
is differentiable in w for any state-action pair. The goal
of policy-based methods is to ﬁnd a policy π which max-
imizes expected return. Policy-based methods update the
policy parameter vector w in the direction of the gradient
of the return with respect to w (Williams, 1992). This gra-
dient can be estimated from samples of interaction between
the learning agent and the environment, (st, at, st+1, rt)
(Sutton et al., 2000). This gradient estimation technique
can have high variance, and thus may require a large num-
ber of samples to converge.

The task was designed to require the human to multi-task,
but not be overly cognitively demanding. First, the right
arm of the Nao is preprogrammed to move in a periodic
pattern of ﬂexion and extension at the elbow joint between
two stable set points within the allowable joint range. The
RL agent controls the left elbow joint by selecting, on each
time step, an action. Actions are deﬁned by an angular
displacement from the current angle. The agent is attempt-
ing to move the left elbow joint so that it matches, on every
time step, the movement of the preprogrammed right elbow
joint. With this conﬁguration and task we are able to deﬁne
an optimal policy, which would track the preprogrammed
joint movement exactly. From this theoretically optimal
trajectory we are able to derive environmental (or MDP)
based rewards given a set acceptable angular error thresh-
old. When the RL-controlled left elbow joint is within the
angular deviation threshold of the preprogrammed right el-
bow joint then a reward of 1 is delivered by the MDP. If the
joints differ by more than the angular threshold then a neg-
ative relative punishment is delivered. The magnitude of
this negative reward is proportional to the absolute differ-
ence between the preprogrammed right arm (optimal) and
the learner controlled left arm.

Actor-critic (AC) methods aim to reduce this problematic
variance by using two learning systems: an actor and a
critic. The actor shapes the policy π and selects the actions,
and the critic predicts the expected return while following
the policy π. The critic represents the value function of the
current policy π in the state s. While this value function
is not known, it can be estimated using temporal difference
learning; this estimate is then used to compute the change
in the parameter vector w. Because S is continuous in
the variables deﬁning it, a standard function approximation
technique, (i.e. tile coding), is often used to transform the
state s into a high-dimensional binary feature vector x(s).
This discretizes the space, and allows for generalization in
the learned policies (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Details in this
paper are limited to those relevant to the current study and
can be found elsewhere (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Peters &
Schaal, 2008).

smear the human feedback forward in time. In these ex-
periments smear = 0.01 (Mathewson & Pilarski, 2017).
It has been shown that the limited human feedback can be
applied across near-optimal state-action pairs, and support
the agent learning an optimal solution (Pilarski et al., 2011;
Knox et al., 2012).

The human wore the Myo EMG band on their right fore-
arm to deliver EMG control signals. When the right arm
joint of the simulated robot was in ﬂexion the human was
instructed to ﬂex their wrist, thereby activating muscles in
the forearm. Optimal ﬂexion caused the EMG state signal
to tend towards 1. Conversely, when the robot extended
the right elbow joint, the human was instructed to relax
their arm. Optimal relaxation caused the EMG state sig-
nal to tend towards 0. This movement pattern created an
EMG control signal with large signal to noise ratio and two
distinct set control points, human wrist ﬂexion and wrist
relaxation.

Human experimental conditions were: 1) human EMG
control signals with no feedback, 2) human EMG control
and feedback signals, 3) human feedback signals with sim-
ulated EMG control signals, as well simulated conditions
were: 4) simulated feedback signals with simulated con-
trol signals, and 5) simulated control signals with no feed-
back signals. The probability of simulated feedback being
given was 0.1, and the probability of that feedback being
correct was 0.8 (Mathewson & Pilarski, 2017). Task per-
formance was measured by taking the average mean abso-
lute angular error from the last 5k steps, providing an es-
timate of asymptotic convergence performance. This was
done to compare the experimental results after initial learn-
ing and helped to reduce noise intrinsic in early learning.
We report several additional experimental results: EMG er-
ror over task performance measured as the absolute differ-
ence from an ideal EMG control signal, reward timing over
the robotic movement trajectory, and total feedback count.
Subjects (N=13) gave informed consent to participate and
the trial was approved by the human research ethics board.

Similar to the state representation used by Mathewson &
Pilarski (2016), the continuous state space is deﬁned by the
ﬁltered, time-averaged, and dimensionally reduced EMG
signal, and the angle of the actuated left elbow joint, and is
represented with approximation using tile coding (Math-
ewson & Pilarski, 2016; 2017).
Parameters were set as
follows: αv = 0.1/m, αµ = ασ, γ = 0.9, λw = 0.3,
λv = 0.7, joint angles were limited by manufacturer spec-
iﬁcations at θ ∈[0.0349, 1.5446] rads.
Weight vectors
wµ, wσ, v, eµ, eσ, ev were initialized to 0 and standard
deviation was bounded by σ ≥0.01. The eligibility trace
update for the critic was scaled by γ to speed up conver-
gence. Maximum number of time steps = 10400, which
provided 13 identical 800 time step waveforms trajectories
between the two set points. Learning updates and action
selection occurred at 33 Hz or every 30 ms. The angular
joint deviation threshold was set to ∆θmax = 0.05 and ab-
solute angular joint updates were clipped to 0.1 to reduce
large angular movements. Actions were selected and per-
formed on every time step.

5. Results

This paper presents results of N=13 subjects performing
all three human conditions, and N=30 for each simulated
condition. Figure 3 shows the mean angular error mea-
sured over all the subjects and the target threshold is shown
in red. This plot indicates that the learning converges for
all experimental human conditions. There is no signiﬁcant
difference between the number of time steps before asymp-
totic convergence between the three conditions. On more
difﬁcult learning tasks, such as when the MDP provides
constant (instead of proportional) negative rewards, shap-
ing feedback signiﬁcantly improves learning (Mathewson
& Pilarski, 2016). The easier learning task in these experi-
ments meant that the system could converge in all runs. If
any of the subjects acted purely adversarially, these systems
might signiﬁcantly diverge.

The ACRL system was trained online with human control
and feedback. Control was deﬁned by the EMG signals
attached to the right arm of the human. Feedback was de-
livered as reward (+1) or punishment (−0.5) through the
pushing of a button on the laptop keyboard. The design of
this unbalanced reward scheme [−0.5, +1] is important as
the range of the feedback matches the range of the envi-
ronment derived punishment (−1.5, 0.05). This provides
an effective balance between relative effects of human and
environment delivered feedback in the algebraic sum of re-
wards, r = rhuman + rMDP . On all time steps MDP re-
ward and human reward were directly summed and applied
to the learning agent update (Algorithm 1).

Figure 4 suggests that there is variability in the EMG con-
trol signals delivered by the humans over the trajectory. It
suggests that there may be a noticeable increase in the vari-
ability of the control signals when the user must simulta-
neously deliver feedback. The top (Control) and middle
(Control+Feedback) ﬁgures show that the human control
signal is often noisy with artifacts which deviated from the
ideal EMG signal. The bottom (Feedback) plot shows the
simulated EMG (used in the human feedback condition);

We are interested in the effects of the user providing con-
trol and feedback signals both independently, and then si-
multaneously to the system. As the human is unable to give
feedback at every step that an agent takes, we need to ac-
count for the fact that after the exact time step a feedback is
given there are likely suboptimal states which support the
optimal trajectory. With a decay parameter we are able to

Figure 3. Performance over Time.
MAE (mean angular error)
over all subjects (blue), and the target threshold (red). This ﬁgure
shows similar performance across all three experimental condi-
tions (control, control+feedback, feedback), which all manage to
ﬁnd a convergence.

Figure 5. Reward Timing. Reward timing is plotting all the re-
ward (gray) the human subjects delivered to the robotic control
system over the entire run. The red line is a single example from
a single subject over a single window. The blue line is the target
joint angle, illustrating the movement trajectory.

Figure 5 plots the timing of the delivered feedback, both re-
ward and punishment. In the top (Control+Feedback) and
middle (Feedback) plots, human reward delivered is plotted
in gray. When the target joint moves (time step 400-450,
visible in blue), the user is temporarily distracted, focuses
on the joint movement, and corrects their hand position to
ensure that the EMG control signal quickly reﬂects the tar-
get joint angle. During this time, there is a noticeable drop
in the amount of feedback that the user is giving to the sys-
tem (in gray). A single run, over a single movement tra-
jectory window, is plotted in red. This randomly selected
example is characteristic of the population effects. The dif-
ference between feedback delivered in the top and middle
subplots indicates that the feedback is more sparse during
simultaneous control and feedback. In the bottom (Sim-
ulated Feedback and Control) plot, simulated feedback is
delivered with a set probability and thus it is much more
consistent across the trajectory, and there is less of a dis-
traction effect.

Figure 4. EMG Errors over Time. EMG error (gray) is measured
as the difference between the human-delivered EMG signal and
the ideal EMG control signal (red) over all subjects. This ﬁgure
shows a single window of the control task showing the two set
points, low and high. Subject data is reshaped to compare with
the ideal EMG control signal in a single window. AU: arbitrary
units.

Figure 6 shows the variability in mean absolute error over
the last 5000 time steps by experimental condition. For the
ﬁrst three (human) conditions (Control, Control+Feedback,
Feedback), the mean value for each subject is plotted in
their own color (consistently offset from left to right), so
that subject trends can be traced between conditions. For
the last two (simulated) conditions, the mean value of each
run is plotted in brown so that the spread around the box
plot can be fully appreciated. This plot suggests that given
the experimental set up in this paper, there is no signiﬁ-
cant difference between the human experimental conditions

by design this signal is relatively stable, with low variabil-
ity and a comparative lack of outliers. Importantly, the top
two plot have thick vertical gray sections around time steps
5-25 and 400-420; this indicates that there is a short reac-
tion window between robotic control and human response.
This reaction delay is about 20 time steps, which corre-
sponds to 660ms, which is well within the human reaction
time window (Knox et al., 2009; Hockley, 1984).

Figure 7. EMG Error by Experimental Condition. This barplot
shows the median and spread of the EMG Error over the hu-
man experimental conditions: C:control, C+F:control and feed-
back, F:feedback, and the simulated experimental conditions:
sim(C+F):simulated control and feedback, sim(C):simulated con-
trol. Colors correspond exactly to Fig. 6. AU: arbitrary units.

Figure 6. Mean Absolute Error Variability by Experimental Con-
dition. Mean absolute error (MAE) over the last 5000 time steps
by experimental condition. This barplot shows the median and
spread of the MAE over the experimental conditions: C:control,
C+F:control and feedback, F:feedback, sim(C+F):simulated con-
trol and feedback, sim(C):simulated control.

in terms of MAE over the last 5000 time steps. Interest-
ingly, by tracing individual subjects, it can be noted that
the performance of some individuals decreases when the
subject must perform simultaneous feedback and control.
This is qualitatively supported by the anecdotal subject ob-
servations of several of the subjects that concentrating on
both control and feedback is difﬁcult.
Additional com-
ments from human participants are included in Supplemen-
tary Material. Earlier work would indicate that on harder
learning tasks, such as when the negative punishment is
constant and not proportional to the distance between the
learner joint angle and the optimal joint angle, human feed-
back can signiﬁcantly improve performance (Mathewson
& Pilarski, 2016). It is important to note that the task per-
formance is somewhat limited by the setting of the angu-
lar difference threshold, ∆θmax. The performance of the
simulations indicates that this threshold and the maximum
number of time steps were limiting factors in asymptotic
convergence.

Figure 8 shows the total feedback count by experimental
condition. In this task there is no signiﬁcant difference be-
tween the distributions of human experimental conditions
in terms of total feedback count, but there is a subject-
speciﬁc trend which suggests that the human will provide
more feedback when they do not have to simultaneously
provide control signals. Furthermore, this ﬁgure suggests
that there may be at least two different styles of users:
those that provide plenty of feedback (more than 400),
and those who only provide a limited amount of feedback
(less than 400). This is an important human-speciﬁc teach-
ing style tendency that will require future work to explore.
More feedback can provide additional shaping toward op-
timal goal states thereby improving performance, but has
a higher probability of creating positive reward cycles (Ng
et al., 1999). By tracing individuals by color on Fig. 8, it
is evident that human subjects provided the most feedback
also performed more optimally on the learning task, on Fig.
6. It is important to note that because condition C incorpo-
rates no human feedback, values for all the subjects is 0.
Because the simulated condition uses a ﬁxed probability of
delivering feedback, in this case P(feedback) = 0.1 there
is not much variability in the simulation runs, resulting in
a tight grouping around the boxplot for Simulated Con-
trol+Feedback (right most boxplot). It is clearly evident
that each run sees a total feedback count of about 1040, or
10% of the total time steps in each run.

Figure 7 plots the EMG error by experimental condition.
In this task there is no signiﬁcant difference between the
human experimental conditions in terms of EMG error, but
there is a subject-speciﬁc trend which suggests that there is
more variability when the human is providing control and
feedback. If the human simultaneously provides feedback
and control signals, they take longer to modify their EMG
control signals and may make mistakes in the delivery of
control signals. It is important to note that because condi-
tions F, sim(C+F), sim(C) rely on simulated EMG data they
have consistent, minimal variability in the EMG error. The
error that is present is based on the error in the simulated
EMG signal which can be visualized in the bottom plot of
Fig. 4 as the difference between the red (ideal) and gray
(simulated) control signals.

6. Discussion

This paper presents the ﬁrst human user study exploring
combinations of human and environmental feedback in
a robotic systems with human-derived EMG control sig-
nals. Simulation and physical experimentation have shown

teaching styles may be elucidated (Torrey & Taylor, 2013).
The paradigm of teaching-on-a-budget may also help to re-
duce feedback fatigue. The amount of feedback, the rate it
is given, and when in a training paradigm is delivered may
be signiﬁcantly affected if there is a budget or cost (real or
assumed) for delivered feedback. Feedback characteristics
may change over training (e.g. amount of feedback given,
reward or punishment, correct or incorrect) due to training
effects or fatigue. Algorithms should be developed which
are robust to, and take advantage of, these deviations.

Future work will explore the correlation between feedback
delivered and the absolute error between the controlled
joint and the target joint. This correlation may vary over
time as the human becomes more knowledgeable about the
learning task and more fatigued. Our results indicate that
humans apply feedback at moments of steady state, and
wait for the robot to ﬁnd stability before feedback is deliv-
ered. From qualitative subject feedback, it seems as though
the humans are ’training for stability ﬁrst’, and then ’focus-
ing on the changes between set points’. By investigating a
more ﬂuid movement task, with multiple set points, or a
completely ﬂuid movement pattern with no set points, the
effects on feedback delivery may be more pronounced.

Figure 8. Total Feedback Count by Experimental Condition. This
barplot shows the median and spread of the total feedback given
over human experimental conditions: C:control, C+F:control and
feedback, F:feedback, and the simulated experimental conditions:
sim(C+F):simulated control and feedback.

agreement in past studies.
Some performance decrease
may be expected with physical robotic systems due to heat,
inertia, and mechanical jitter. Simulation provides safety,
controlled repeatability and batch processing (Mathewson
& Pilarski, 2016).

The question of optimal outcome metrics for measuring
humans-machines interaction remains open. In this study
we explore the effects of tightly coupled control signals on
feedback, and the effects of rapidly delivered feedback sig-
nals on control signals. In an optimal collaboration, the
human should not be required to deliver signals (control
and feedback) when the system has no use for them. Simi-
larly, the system should start to model the human delivered
signals (Knox & Stone, 2009; Vien et al., 2013).

7. Conclusions

The main contributions of this paper are two-fold. First,
we present the ﬁrst human user study on a human-robot
cooperative task where the human is simultaneously pro-
viding control and feedback signals in the training of an
actor-critic RL robotic agent. Second, we present a Gen-
eral Interactive Learning Framework (Fig. 2), useful for
clearly framing and understanding communication chan-
nels in IML systems.

There exist a limited number of channels through which a
human may provide control and feedback. The ﬁeld will
progress to explore the density of information for these
communication channels, as described in General Interac-
tive Learning Framework in Fig. 2. Bandwidth and ex-
plicitness in human signals delivered to learning agents has
been explored previously (Pilarski & Sutton, 2012; Pilarski
et al., 2015). Future work will quantify amounts of human
input input relative to levels of autonomy (Smith, 2013).

Our results indicate that feedback changes when control
signals are simultaneously delivered, and feedback can
be delivered without sacriﬁcing quality of control signals.
As well, we show results on how the delivered feedback
changes over time during training.

This work provides novel results and a new viewpoint on
the human training of a semi-autonomous robotic system,
and therefore takes important steps toward IML wherein
collaborative human and machine intelligence will be able
to solve complex problems of the future. Future work will
explore extensions from this experimental platform, meth-
ods to model, generalize, and deliver consistent human
feedback, and work on end-to-end training of these sys-
tems through the incorporation of improved representation
learning. We expect that key limitations in human-robot
interaction can be addressed by incorporating continually
adapting control signals and shaping through feedback, es-
pecially when robot capacity exceeds control capabilities.

There are noticeable teaching style differences between at
least 2 groups of human participants, see Fig. 8, as has
been previously explored in related work (Loftin et al.,
2016b; Macglashan et al., 2016). Trainers may also vary on
whether they provide more positive or more negative feed-
back and whether they believe the feedback to be instruc-
tional and guiding or responsive and reactive (Ho et al.,
2016).
Future algorithmic improvements should exploit
predicted teacher style to build beliefs about the provided
feedback (Loftin et al., 2016b; Macglashan et al., 2016).

By imposing a feedback budget on the human, different

References

Knox, W Bradley and Stone, Peter. Reinforcement learning
from human reward: Discounting in episodic tasks. In
The 21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication, pp. 878–885, 2012.

Argall, Brenna D, Chernova, Sonia, Veloso, Manuela, and
Browning, Brett.
A survey of robot learning from
demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57
(5):469–483, 2009.

Knox, W. Bradley and Stone, Peter. Framing reinforcement
learning from human reward: Reward positivity, tempo-
ral discounting, episodicity, and performance. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 225:24–50, 2015. ISSN 00043702. doi:
10.1016/j.artint.2015.03.009.

Castellini, Claudio, Artemiadis, Panagiotis, Wininger,
Michael, Ajoudani, Arash, Alimusaj, Merkur, Bicchi,
Antonio, Caputo, Barbara, Craelius, William, Dosen,
Strahinja, Englehart, Kevin, Farina, Dario, Gijsberts, Ar-
jan, Godfrey, Sasha B., Hargrove, Levi, Ison, Mark,
Kuiken, Todd, Markovi´c, Marko, Pilarski, Patrick M.,
Rupp, Rdiger, and Scheme, Erik.
Proceedings of the
ﬁrst workshop on peripheral machine interfaces: Go-
ing beyond traditional surface electromyography.
In
Frontiers in Neurorobotics, volume 8, pp. 22, 8 2014.
ISBN 1662-5218 (Electronic) 1662-5218 (Linking). doi:
10.3389/fnbot.2014.00022.

Knox, W. Bradley, Fasel, Ian, and Stone, Peter. Design
principles for creating human-shapable agents. In AAAI
Spring 2009 Symposium on Agents that Learn from Hu-
man Teachers, March 2009.

Knox, W Bradley, Glass, Brian D, Love, Bradley C, Mad-
dox, W Todd, and Stone, Peter.
How humans teach
agents. International Journal of Social Robotics, 4(4):
409–421, 2012.

Chernova, Sonia and Thomaz, Andrea L.
Robot Learn-
ing from Human Teachers.
Synthesis Lectures on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning, 8(3):1–
121, 4 2014.
ISSN 1939-4608.
doi:
10.2200/
S00568ED1V01Y201402AIM028.

Loftin, Robert, Peng, Bei, MacGlashan, James, Littman,
Michael L., Taylor, Matthew E., Huang, Jeff, and
Roberts, David L.
Learning behaviors via human-
delivered discrete feedback: modeling implicit feedback
strategies to speed up learning.
Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems, 30(1):30–59, 1 2016a. ISSN
15737454. doi: 10.1007/s10458-015-9283-7.

Fails, Jerry Alan and Olsen Jr, Dan R. Interactive machine
learning. In Proceedings of the 8th international con-
ference on Intelligent user interfaces, pp. 39–45. ACM,
2003.

Loftin, Robert, Peng, Bei, MacGlashan, James, Littman,
Michael L, Taylor, Matthew E, Huang, Jeff, and Roberts,
David L. Learning behaviors via human-delivered dis-
crete feedback: modeling implicit feedback strategies to
speed up learning. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent
Systems, 30(1):30–59, 2016b.

Ho, Mark K, Littman, Michael, MacGlashan, James, Cush-
man, Fiery, and Austerweil, Joseph L.
Showing ver-
sus doing: Teaching by demonstration. In Lee, D. D.,
Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V., Guyon, I., and Gar-
nett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 29, pp. 3027–3035. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2016.

Macglashan, James, Littman, Michael L, Roberts, David L,
Loftin, Robert, Peng, Bei, and Taylor, Matthew E. Con-
vergent Actor Critic by Humans. In International Con-
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2016.

Hockley, William E. Analysis of response time distribu-
tions in the study of cognitive processes. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 10(4):598, 1984.

MacGlashan, James, Ho, Mark K., Loftin, Robert Tyler,
Peng, Bei, Roberts, David L., Taylor, Matthew E., and
Littman, Michael L. Interactive learning from policy-
dependent human feedback.
CoRR, abs/1701.06049,
2017.

Knox, W. Bradley and Stone, Peter. Interactively Shaping
Agents via Human Reinforcement: The TAMER Frame-
work. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Capture, pp. 9–16, New York, New
York, USA, 2009. ACM Press. ISBN 9781605586588.
doi: 10.1145/1597735.1597738.

Mathewson, Kory W. and Pilarski, Patrick M. Simultane-
ous Control and Human Feedback in the Training of a
Robotic Agent with Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learn-
ing. In IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence - Interactive Machine Learning Work-
shop, 2016.

Knox, W Bradley and Stone, Peter. Combining Manual
Feedback with Subsequent MDP Reward Signals for Re-
inforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 9th Inter-
national Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multia-
gent Systems, pp. 5–12, 2010. ISBN 978-0-9826571-1-9.

Mathewson, Kory Wallace and Pilarski, Patrick M.
Re-
inforcement learning based embodied agents modelling
human users through interaction and multi-sensory per-
ception. Accepted to the 2017 AAAI Spring Symposium

on Interactive Multi-Sensory Object Perception for Em-
bodied Agents, March 27-29, 2017, Stanford University,
USA., 2017.

Thomaz, Andrea L. and Breazeal, Cynthia.
Teachable
robots: Understanding human teaching behavior to build
more effective robot learners. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 172
(6-7):716–737, 4 2008. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.
artint.2007.09.009.

Ng, Andrew Y., Harada, Daishi, and Russell, Stuart J. Pol-
icy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and
application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
’99, pp. 278–287, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1-55860-612-2.

Thomaz, Andrea Lockerd, Hoffman, Guy, and Breazeal,
Cynthia.
Real-time interactive reinforcement learning
for robots. In AAAI 2005 Workshop on Human Com-
prehensible Machine Learning., 2005.

Torrey, Lisa and Taylor, Matthew.
Teaching on a bud-
get: Agents advising agents in reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 1053–
1060. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, 2013.

Peters, Jan and Schaal, Stefan. Natural actor-critic. Neuro-
computing, 71(7):1180–1190, 2008.

Pilarski, Patrick and Sutton, Richard. Between instruction
and reward: Human-prompted switching. In AAAI Fall
Symposium Series: Robots Learning Interactively from
Human Teachers, 2012.

Vien, Ngo Anh, Ertel, Wolfgang, and Chung, Tae Choong.
Learning via human feedback in continuous state
and action spaces.
Applied Intelligence, 39(2):267–
278, 9 2013.
ISSN 0924669X.
doi:
10.1007/
s10489-012-0412-6.

Pilarski, Patrick M., Dawson, Michael R., Degris, Thomas,
Fahimi, Farbod, Carey, Jason P., and Sutton, Richard S.
Online human training of a myoelectric prosthesis con-
troller via actor-critic reinforcement learning. In IEEE
International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics,
pp. 1–7. IEEE, 6 2011.
ISBN 9781424498628.
doi:
10.1109/ICORR.2011.5975338.

Williams, Ronald J. Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning.
Machine Learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.

Pilarski, Patrick M, Dick, Travis B, and Sutton, Richard S.
Real-time Prediction Learning for the Simultaneous Ac-
tuation of Multiple Prosthetic Joints. In IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, pp. 1–8,
2013.

Pilarski, Patrick M, Sutton, Richard S, and Mathewson,
Kory W. Prosthetic devices as goal-seeking agents. In
2nd Workshop on Present and Future of Non-Invasive
Peripheral-Nervous-System Machine Interfaces, Singa-
pore, 2015.

Skinner, Burrhus Frederic. The Behavior of Organisms: An
experimental analysis. Appleton-Century, Oxford, 1938.
ISBN 1-58390-007-1. doi: 10.1037/h0052216.

Smith, BW. Summary of levels of driving automation for
on-road vehicles. Center for Internet and Society, Stan-
ford Law School, 2013.

Sutton, Richard S. and Barto, Andrew G. Reinforcement
learning: An introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1st
edition, 1998.

Sutton, Richard S, McAllester, David A., Singh, Satin-
der P., and Mansour, Yishay. Policy gradient methods for
reinforcement learning with function approximation. In
Solla, S. A., Leen, T. K., and M¨uller, K. (eds.), Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 12, pp. 1057–
1063. MIT Press, 2000.