Rahul Mohanani, Iflaah Salman, Burak Turhan, Member, IEEE, Pilar Rodriguez and Paul Ralph

Abstract—One source of software project challenges and failures is the systematic errors introduced by human cognitive biases.
Although extensively explored in cognitive psychology, investigations concerning cognitive biases have only recently gained popularity

in software engineering research. This paper therefore systematically maps, aggregates and synthesizes the literature on cognitive
biases in software engineering to generate a comprehensive body of knowledge, understand state of the art research and provide
guidelines for future research and practise. Focusing on bias antecedents, effects and mitigation techniques, we identified 65 articles
(published between 1990 and 2016), which investigate 37 cognitive biases. Despite strong and increasing interest, the results reveal a
scarcity of research on mitigation techniques and poor theoretical foundations in understanding and interpreting cognitive biases.
Although bias-related research has generated many new insights in the software engineering community, speciﬁc bias mitigation
techniques are still needed for software professionals to overcome the deleterious effects of cognitive biases on their work.

Index Terms—Antecedents of cognitive bias. cognitive bias. debiasing, effects of cognitive bias. software engineering, systematic
mapping.

1
INTRODUCTION

OGNITIVE biases are systematic deviations from op-
timal reasoning [1], [2]. In other words, they are re-
curring errors in thinking, or patterns of bad judgment
observable in different people and contexts. A well-known
example is conﬁrmation bias—the tendency to pay more at-
tention to information that agrees with our preconceptions.
Cognitive biases help to explain many common software
engineering (SE) problems in diverse activities including
design [3], [4], [5], testing [6], [7], requirements engineering

knowledge. No analogous review of SE research exists. The
purpose of this study is therefore as follows:
Purpose: to review, summarize and synthesize the current
state of software engineering research involving cognitive
biases.
Here, we use current state of research to encompass not only
publication trends, publication outlets, research methods,
SE knowledge areas and proliﬁc authors but also bias an-
tecedents, effects and mitigation approaches.
This study is timely for two reasons: 1) studies involving
different cognitive biases tend to be disconnected from one
another; 2) enough studies have now been published to fa-
cilitate substantial synthesis. This means that summarizing
and aggregating research on cognitive biases in SE can now
identify interesting patterns and produce new knowledge
by connecting previously unconnected research.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section
provides a brief primer on cognitive biases, including their
causes, effects and consequences. Section 3 describes this
study’s research questions and method; that is, systematic
mapping. We then present the ﬁndings in Section 4. Section
5 discusses the implications and limitations of our ﬁndings
and offers avenues for future research. Section 6 concludes
the paper with a summary of its contributions. Appendix
A defines all of the biases discussed in this paper while
Appendix B lists the primary studies.

[8], [9] and project management [10]. Research on cognitive
biases is useful not only to identify common errors, their
causes and how to avoid them in SE processes, but also for
developing better practices [7], [8], methods [11], [12] and
artifacts [3], [13].
While there is no definitive index, over 200 cognitive
biases have been identiﬁed in psychology, sociology and
management research. Some studies in the information sys-
tems (IS) community provide a general overview (e.g. [14],
[15], [16]). In their systematic literature review, Fleischmann
et al.
[16] identiﬁed areas in IS where cognitive biases
have already received substantial attention (e.g. IS usage,
IS management) and areas where further investigation is
warranted (e.g. software development, application systems).
Such reviews help to synthesize and condense empirical
ﬁndings into a more communicable, cumulative body of

0
Conﬁrmation bias is implicated in the common an-
tipattern where unit tests attempt to confirm that the
code works rather than to reveal failures [28].
.
Optimism bias, the tendency to produce unrealis-
tically optimistic estimates [29], contributes to all
kinds of projects (not only software projects) exceed-
ing their schedules and budgets [30], [31].
o
The ﬂaming eﬁ‘ect—the tendency to give different re-
sponses to problems that have surface dissimilarities
but are formally identical [2]—can reduce design
creativity [3], [32].

3
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHOD

This section describes our research protocol (i.e. how we
collected and analyzed data). We adopted a systematic map-
ping study (SMS) approach because we expected existing
research to be fragmented and not follow common termi-
nology or use established theoretical concepts. An SMS ap-
proach works well in such circumstances because it involves
categorizing and aggregating knowledge dispersed across
disconnected studies. This section details our approach,
which is based on established guidelines (cf. [50]—[53]).

Fleischmann [16] synthesizes a taxonomy of cognitive bi-
ases (based on previous studies [33]—[35]) comprising eight
categories. Table 1 defines each of these categories. The
categories have good face validity but it is not clear if they
are exhaustive or mutually exclusive.
Identifying causes of cognitive biases is more challeng-
ing. Since Tversky and Kahneman [36] introduced the term
in the early 1970s, a vast body of research has investigated
cognitive biases in diverse disciplines including psychology
[37], medicine [38] and management [16]. Much of this
research has focused on heuristics—sirnple, efﬁcient rules
for making decisions and judgments. Well-known heuristics
include anchoring and adjustment (i.e., estimating a quan-
tity by adjusting from an initial starting value [39]) and
availability (i.e., estimating the importance of something
based on how easy it is to recall [40]).
Kahneman [33] went on to differentiate fast, ”system
one” thinking from slow, ”system two” thinking. System
one thinking is unconscious, effortless, intuitive, and prone
to biases. System two thinking, contrastingly, is conscious,
effortful, more insightful, more rational, more statistical and
less prone to biases.
However, cognitive biases can be generated by phe-
nomena other than system one thinking, including emotion
[41], social inﬂuences [42] and noisy information processing
[43]. The generative mechanisms for many cognitive biases
remain poorly-understood.
SE researchers are also interested in debiasing; that is,
preventing cognitive biases or mitigating their deleterious
effects [23], [44]. As Fischoff [45] explains, debiasing inter-
ventions can be divided into ﬁve levels:

3.1
Research questions

Based on our research purpose—to review, summarize and
synthesize the current state of software engineering research
involving cognitive biases—the research questions for this
systematic mapping study are as follows:
RQl)
RQ2)
What cognitive biases are investigated?
What antecedents of cognitive biases are investi-
gated?
RQ3)
What effects of cognitive biases are investigated?
RQ4)
What debiasing approaches are investigated?
RQ5)
What research methods are used?
RQ6)
When were the articles published?
RQ7)
Where were the articles published?
RQ8)
Who is conducting the research?
RQ9)
Which SWEBOK knowledge areas are targeted by
research on cognitive biases?

3.2
Protocol Overview

All of the authors planned and agreed the study protocol
Visualized in Fig. 1. It consists of the following steps.

Interest biases
Biases that distort reasoning based on an ”individual’s preferences, ideas, or sympathy
Conﬁrmation bias,
for other people or arguments” [16, p. 5].
wishful thinking

Stability biases
Biases that lead individuals to persevere with established or familiar options despite the
Anchoring bias,
presence of superior information, arguments or conditions.
default bias

Action-oriented biases
Biases that lead individuals to premature decisions without considering relevant infor-
Overconﬁdence bias,
mation or alternative courses of action.
optimism bias
Pattern recognition biases
Biases that lead individuals to attend more to information that is familiar.
Availability bias,
ﬁxation

Framing effect,
selective perception
Hindsight bias,
time-based bias
Hyperbolic discount-
ing, sunk cost bias
Bandwagon effect,
cultural bias

Perception biases
Biases that prejudice the processing of new information.

Memory biases
Biases that affect recall of information or experience.

Decision biases

Biases that occur speciﬁcally during decision-making, and compromise decision quality.

Social biases
relationships with, other individuals.

Biases that prejudice judgment based on individuals’ attitudes toward, and social

6)
Check for sampling bias by searching for software
AND ”cognitive bias” on Google Scholar1 as de-
scribed in Section 3.5.3. (No primary studies added.)
7)
Check for sampling bias by searching for software
AND [name of cognitive bias], using a list of cognitive
biases (see Section 3.5.4 for more details). (Added
one primary study for a total of 66.)
8)
Assess the quality of the primary studies (see Sec-
tion 3.6). (Excluded one study for a total of 65.)
9)
Extract from the primary studies the data needed to
answer the research questions (see Section 3.7).

3.4
Primary study selection

3.4.1
De-duplication
We used RefWorksZ, to store and organize the retrieved
articles, and to automatically remove 239 exact duplicates.
We then exported the bibliographic entries to a spreadsheet
and manually removed 69 additional duplicates.

3.4.2
Screening

Next, we applied the following inclusion criteria.

1)
The article is written in English.
2)
The context of the study is software engineering:
”a systematic approach to the analysis, design, as-
sessment, implementation, test, maintenance and re-
engineering of software, that is, the application of
engineering to software” [55].
3)
The article explicitly involves at least one cognitive
bias.
4)
The article is published in a scholarly journal or in a
conference, workshop or symposium proceedings.

3.3
Literature search

3.3.1
Database selection and search string formatting
We selected five online databases—IEEE Xplore, Scopus,
Web
of Science, the ACM Digital Library and Science
Direct—following Dybé et a1.
[54]. These databases are
frequently used to conduct secondary reviews on computer
science and SE topics, and, in our experience, provide good
coverage, filtering and export functionality. We used full-
text search (rather than limiting to title and abstract). Where
available, we used ﬁlters to avoid articles from outside SE.
To maximize coverage, we ﬁrst tried the search string
software AND bias. This produced an unmanageable number
of articles (224037) including topics such as ’researcher bias’
and ’publication bias’, which are not cognitive biases. Replac-
ing ’bias’ with related terms including ’heuristics’, ’fallacies’,
and ’illusions’ similarly returned copious irrelevant results.
We therefore revised the search string to software AND
”cognitive bias”. This produced a more manageable 826
records (Table 2). All searches were completed on 20 De-
cember 2016.
Before conducting these searches, we identified ten well-
known, relevant studies based on our experience. We rea-
soned that, if any of these studies were missing from the
sample, it would suggest a problem with the search strategy.
All ten studies were found.

We screened the studies initially based on their titles, con-
sulting the abstract or entire text only when necessary to
reach a conﬁdent judgment.
To develop a common understanding of the topic of
study and inclusion criteria, two of the authors indepen-
dently piloted the screening process on 20 randomly se-
lected papers. This produced medium to high agreement
(Cohen’s Kappa = 0.77) [56]. Disagreements were resolved
by consensus and discussion with the rest of the team,
improving our common understanding of the inclusion
criteria. This process raised concerns regarding non-peer—
reviewed articles, academic dissertations, short papers, aca-
demic research plans, and studies where cognitive biases
were mentioned only tangentially.
We therefore devised the following exclusion criteria.

1)
The article is not peer-reviewed.

Database
Search string
Filters applied
Results

Scopus
software AND ”cognitive bias”
Included only the ’computer science’ category.
296
Science Direct
software AND ”cognitive bias”
Included only the ’joumals’ and ’computer science’ categories.
293
IEEE Xplore
(software AND ”cognitive bias”)
Included only ’conference publications’ and ’joumals & magazines’.
153
ACM Digital Library
”software” AND ”cognitive bias”
Excluded ’newsletters’.
69
Web Of Science
software AND ”cognitive bias”
No ﬁlters were used.
15

2)
The article is a doctoral/master’s dissertation or
research plan, short paper or report thereof.
3)
The article’s references to cognitive biases were tan-
,,r—~\\
fﬁ
fﬂ‘x
fx—‘x
gential to its purpose or contributions.

3’
x___._——r'
x._
The third exclusion criteria was needed to exclude studies
IEEE
ACM Digital
Dampu Q
Web Of
Science
that mentioned a speciﬁc bias or cognitive biases in general,
X910“?-
lerar}."
(295..
309939
DWECT
but did not use the concept of cognitive biases in the study.
\
1 531
{69}
J
l 15‘]
dads;-
Some artlcles, for example, did not talk about cognitlve

rv/ “a
.x’
‘
r/
\x
‘T

./
biases at all, but the term ”cognitive bias” appeared in the
reference list. Other papers discussed cognitive biases in
their related work, but made no further use of the concept.
The same two authors applied the inclusion and (new)
exclusion criteria to another 20 randomly selected papers,
yielding high agreement (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.9). We deemed

\X‘
\
M
l‘

Total Retrieved: 826

""""""""""1E """""""""" '
this sufficient to proceed, and completed the remainder of

5
De-duplication: 308
'3
the screening. At the end of this stage, we had included 40

3
[Automated 239. tartanualz 69'}
E
Primary Studies-

+3
9*»
3.5
Ensuring sampling adequacy

.
1)
There exist relevant articles in the population that
v
f
are not in our sampling frame; for example, studies
Backward snowballing
'
of cognitive biases published in non-SE outlets that

‘1'
Primary study selection
‘3
(Included: 40)

This study has two basic threats to sampling adequacy:

We took several steps to mitigate these threats, including
backward snowballing, author analysis, searching without
ﬁlters and searching speciﬁc bias names.


Search executed by using missing
cognitive biases from IS domain

3.5. 1
Backward snowballing

{Included 16:]
are not indexed by the target search engines, or

excluded by the ﬁlters we used (see Section 3.3.1).
v
2)
There exist relevant articles in the sampling frame

Author's proﬁle analysis
that are not in the sample; for example, an article
(Included: 9)
about conﬁrmation bias that never uses the term

V}
”cognitive bias”.
Search executed on
Google Scholar search engine

\
1"Included: 0‘]
,

(Included: 1)

vb

Quality assessment
[Excluded 1}

1
Total Primary Studies
Included: 65

We iteratively and exhaustively checked the references of
all included studies for additional relevant studies. That
is, each time we included a new study, we also checked
its references, leading to four iterations (Table 3) and 16
additional primary studies.
Upon closer inspection, 14 of the studies identiﬁed this
way did not use the term ”cognitive bias” anywhere in the
text, preferring the name of the individual bias. The other
two studies were published in information systems and
psychology outlets.

Fig. 1. Primary Study Selection Process

3.5.2
Author's analysis

Round 1
10
Round 2
4
Round 3
1
Round 4
1

Total
16

personal website of each author of five or more primary
studies. This produced nine additional primary studies (all
of which were previously missed because they did not in-
clude the term ”cognitive bias”). Backward snowballing on
these new articles did not produce any additional primary
studies.

3.7
Data extraction

Next, we extracted the data elements shown in Table 6.
We used the qualitative data analysis software NVIVO3,
because it is good for organizing, analyzing and visualizing
unstructured qualitative data, and for classifying articles
based on bibliographic information. We coded parts of
each primary study with the name of the cognitive bias
investigated, wherever an antecedent, effect or debiasing
approach is discussed. We then organized the data based on
the research questions (see Section 4). The coding schema
and classiﬁcations were thoroughly reviewed by the whole
author team.

3.5.3
Unfiltered search
We searched Google Scholar for software AND ”cognitive
bias” with publication dates up to and including 2016. This
returned about 200 000 records. We manually screened the
ﬁrst 150 results and found no new relevant studies.

3.5.4
Searching specific bias names

Ideally, we could use a comprehensive list of cognitive
biases to search each target database for speciﬁc bias names
(e.g. software AND ”framing eﬁ‘ect”). However, with over 200
known biases and five databases, this constitutes over 1000
individual searches. Moreover, we have no credible com-
prehensive list. We therefore compared the list of cognitive
biases found in primary studies to the list in Fleischmann
et al.’s review of cognitive biases in information systems
[16], and found 18 biases investigated in IS but not in
any of the primary studies— uﬂer—purchase rationalization,
ambiguity eﬁ'ect, attribution error, buse—rute fallacy, congruence
bias, consistency bias, cultural bias, emotional bias, exponential
forecast bias, input bias, irrational escalation, loss aversion bias,
mental accounting, priming eﬂect, reactance, selective perception,
stereotype bias and zero-risk perception.
We searched each database for each of 18 new biases
(e.g. software AND (”ambiguity eﬁ'ect” OR ”emotional bias”
OR
) and found one new study (66 in total). Backward
snowballing on the reference list retrieved no new studies.

4
RESULTS

This section addresses each research question (RQl—RQ9).
We refer to primary studies with a ’P’ (e.g. [P42]) to distin-
guish them from citations to other references (e.g. [42]).

4.1
What cognitive biases are investigated?

The primary studies investigate 37 different cognitive bi-
ases, which are listed and defined in Appendix A. Fig. 2
shows the frequency of occurrence of each cognitive bias
broken down by SE knowledge area. The most common are
anchoring bias (26), conﬁrmation bias (23), and overconﬁ-
dence bias (16).
The exact number of cognitive biases investigated is
difﬁcult to pin down because some articles use different
names for the same cognitive bias. We combined obvious
synonyms (e.g. ”optimism bias” and ”over—optimism bias”).
We did not combine closely related biases (e.g. optimism
bias and the valence effect). Section 5.2 returns to the issue
of inconsistent terminology.
To get a higher—level view of what kinds of cognitive
biases are used more or less frequently, we categorized the
biases using Fleishmann’s taxonomy [16] (Table 7). The total
number of studies in Table 7 add up to more than the num-
ber of included primary studies (i.e. 65), as some primary
studies investigate cognitive biases in multiple categories.
Two authors independently categorized the biases and
resolved disagreements through discussion. As the cate-
gories may not be mutually exclusive, we classified each
bias into the most appropriate category. Some biases (e.g.
information bias) do not ﬁt into any category. These results
should be considered in light of mediocre 55% agreement
between judges.

3.6
Quality assessment

><><><><><><><><><><><><

><><><><><><

TABLE 5
Classification of Primary Study Based on Research Type

Type
Description
Primary studies
Total

Empirical
Articles that analyze primary data such as quan-
titative measurements, questionnaire responses,
interviews, archival data and ﬁeld notes.

P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, P8, P9, P10, P11, P12, P13, P15, P16, P17,
47 (72%)
P18, P19, P24, P25, P28, P29, P31, P34, P38, P39, P40, P41,
P42, P43, P44, P46, P47, P48, P49, P50, P51, P52, P53, P54,
P55, P56, P57, P58, P59, P61, P62, P63, P65

P3, P7, P14, P20, P21, P22, P23, P26, P27, P30, P32, P33, P35,
18 (28%)
P36, P37, P45, P60, P64

Non-empirical
Articles that do not analyze primary data, in-
cluding not only opinion papers but also analyt-
ical, conceptual and purely theoretical research.

TABLE 6
Data Extraction Elements


Element
RQ
Description

Cognitive bias
RQ1
The bias(es) investigated or discussed in the study.
Antecedents
RQ2
Causes of biases investigated or discussed in the study.
Effects
RQ3
Consequences of biases investigated or discussed in the study.
Debiasing approaches
RQ4
Treatments, techniques, or strategies reported to prevent biases or mitigate their effects.
Research method
RQ5
The kind of study (e.g. experiment, case study).
Year
RQ6
The year in which the study was published.
Source
RQ7
The journal, conference or workshop where the study was published or presented.
Authors’ names
RQS
The authors of the study.
SE knowledge area
RQ9
The knowledge area (from SWEBOK version 3) to which the study contributes.

Biases from all eight categories are investigated. The
most investigated categories are interest biases (which dis-
tort reasoning based on the individual’s interests) and sta-
bility biases (which bias reasoning in favour of current
conditions). In contrast, only two studies investigate social
biases (in which social relationships undermine judgment).

for sprint planning. In the middle of ofﬁce A’s whiteboard
it says ”What can we finish in the next two weeks?”, but
ofﬁce B’s whiteboard says ”two days.” Now suppose the
team has a virtual meeting to estimate the time needed
to build a speciﬁc feature, which will take about a week.
Anchoring bias explains team members in ofﬁce A giving
higher estimates than team members in ofﬁce B.

Several primary studies (e.g. [P16], [P17]) suggest po-
tential antecedents of anchoring bias, including inexperi-
ence. Jain et al. suggest that experts are less susceptible to
anchoring bias than novices [P16]. Meanwhile, uncertainty,
lack of business knowledge and inflexible clients exacerbate
anchoring during decision—making in project—based organi-
zations [P63]. Other biases, including confirmation bias and
availability bias, may also promote anchoring and adjust-
ment [P17].

4.2
What antecedents of cognitive biases are investi-
gated?
Although the primary studies investigate 37 cognitive bi-
ases, they only consider the antecedents of eleven (Table 8).
This section discusses each in turn.

Bias category
Cognitive biases
# of
Primary study ID
studies

Interest
Conﬁrmation, IKEA effect, valence effect, valid-
30
P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P10, P12, P13, P14, P16, P17, P18, P20,
ity effect, wishful thinking
P21, P22, P25, P26, P27, P30, P31, P32, P36, P37, P39, P43,
P44, P49, P55, P57, P64.

Stability
Anchoring and adjustment, belief perseverance,
29
P1, P2, P7, P10, P11, P16, P17, P18, P20, P21, P22, P25,
default, endowment effect, status-quo
P30, P33, P34, P37, P38, P42, P43, P47, P49, P51, P53, P56,
P57, P60, P63, P64, P65.

Action-oriented
(Over)conﬁdence, impact, invincibility, miserly
22
P3, P16, P20, P21, P22, P24, P31, P37, P41, P45, P46, P48,
information
processing,
misleading
informa—
P49, P50, P51, P52, P54, P57, P58, P59, P61, P62.
tion, normalcy effect, (over)optimism

Pattern recognition
Availability, mere exposure effect, ﬁxation, Sem—
19
P7, P10, P11, P13, P16, P17, P18, P19, P22, P23, P29, P32,
melweis reﬂex
P37, P39, P43, P60, P63, P64, P65.

Perception
Attentional, contrast effect, framing effect, halo
9
P19, P20, P28, P35, P36, P40, P60, P63, P64.
effect, primacy and recency effect, selective per-
ception, semantic fallacy
Memory
Hindsight, time—based bias
6
P30, P36, P49, P57, P60, P63.

Decision
Hyperbolic discounting, infrastructure, neglect
3
P36, P37, P63.
of probability, sunk cost

Social
Bandwagon effect
2
P21, P22.

Other
Representativeness, information
9
P7, P10, P15, P29, P32, P36, P43, P53, P60.

Optimism bias is also related to project initiation. For
example, winner’s curse is the phenomenon in which the
most competitive—not the most realistic—bid is selected
[P59].

studies (e.g. [P2], [P20], [P33]) use this broader meaning.
For example, one primary study found that system de-
signers anchor on preconceived ideas, reducing their explo-
ration of problems and solutions [P33]. Similarly, developers
tend to re-use existing queries rather than writing new ones,
even when the existing queries do not work in the new sit-
uation [P2]. Two primary studies ([P17], [P18]) investigated
developers insufﬁciently adjusting systems due to change
requests. They found that missing, weak, and neglect of
traceability knowledge leads developers to anchor on their
own understanding of the system, which causes poor ad-
justments (i.e., deﬁcient modiﬁcations). Another study [P20]
found that decision-makers struggled to adjust to new or
changed environments because they were anchored on their
outdated understanding of a previous context.

4.2.3
Availability bias

Availability bias is the tendency for easy—to-recall informa-
tion to unduly inﬂuence preconceptions or judgments [60].
For example, availability bias manifests in two ways
when searching software documentation [P13]: (1) profes-
sionals use inappropriate keywords because they are famil-
iar and easy to remember; (2) professionals struggle to find
answers in unfamiliar locations in documentation. Never-
theless, prior knowledge has a positive overall effect on ef-
ﬁciency and effectiveness in documentation searches [P13].
Availability bias can also manifest in project-based or-
ganizations, when decisions are based on information that
is easy to recall or in the absence of lessons learned from
previously-completed projects [P63].

4.2.4
Confirmation bias

Bias
Antecedents
Knowledge area

Reusing previously written queries; difﬁcult to identify referential points (anchors) [P2]
Consh'uction
Missing, weak and disuse of traceability knowledge [P17], [P18]
Design, Construction
Anchoring
Recalling domain related information from past knowledge [P18]
Consh'uction
and
Not being able to adjust to the new environment [P20]
Requirements
Adjustment
Development experience [P16]
Consh'uction
Uncertainty of future actions, lack of business / historical knowledge and inﬂexible clients [P63]
Management
Conﬁrmation and availability bias during design; [P17]
Design

Technical roles (project manager, technology developers); effort estimation strategy [P50]
Management
Task difﬁculty; task size [P52]
Management
Optimism
Esﬁmates asking format [P47]
Management
Psychologically distant project risks [P24]
Management
Winners curse in project bidding [P59]
Management

Prior—knowledge; earlier experience in searching [P13]
Management
Availability
Lack of historical records of lessons learned [P63]
Management
Selection of test—cases due to impossibility to perform exhaustive testing [P32]
General

Prior—knowledge [P13]
Maintenance
Confirmation
Lack of training in logical reasoning and mathematical proof reading; experience and being active
Testing
in a role (developer / tester) [P4]
Varied level of domain-expertise, speciﬁcation completeness, presence of errors [P31]
Testing

Fixation/
Framing desiderata as ”requirements” [P19]
Requirements
framing

Overconﬁdence
Inability to question the fundamental way of thinking [P45]
Management

Hindsight
Weak historical basis of lessons learned [P63]
Management

Mere
Assigning someone to a different project role, leaving one’s comfort zone, pessimism about change
Management
exposure
outcomes [P63]

Halo effect
Subjective evaluation criteria being affected by the ﬁrst impression [P63]
Management

Sunk cost bias
Extending decisions based on immediate beneﬁts without considering costs of changes; stubborn—
Management
ness and comfort zone characteristics of project managers [P63]

the search only on information that confirms their existing
knowledge. Prior knowledge therefore has a negative net
effect on information retrieval from software documentation
[P13].
Interestingly, professionals who were experienced but
inactive as developer/testers showed less confirmation bias
than those who were both experienced and active [P4].
Participants who have been trained in logical reasoning and
hypothesis testing skills manifested less conﬁrmation bias
in software testing [P4].

4.2.7
Hindsight bias, mere exposure effect, halo effect and
sunk cost bias

One qualitative interview study [P63] includes numerous
participant speculations as to the causes of several biases.
To be clear, interviews do not demonstrate causal links, but
we report the speculated causes for completeness.
Hindsight bias refers to the tendency to regard the out-
come of a process as having been predictable all along, or at
least more predictable than they would have judged before
knowing the outcome [63]. The absence of archived records
from previous projects may increase hindsight bias [P63].
The mere exposure effect is the tendency to prefer the
familiar [64]. For example, project participants tend to prefer
their current role in the project [P63].
The halo effect is the tendency to use global evalua-
tions to make judgments about speciﬁc traits [65]. In a job
interview, for example, the interviewer might incorrectly
infer that more charismatic candidates are more technically
competent. Several potential antecedents for the halo effect
are suggested, including ”subjective evaluation criteria
communication problems, the focus on people faults, and
the absence of transparency in sharing personal problems”

4.2.5
Fixation and framing effect
Fixation is the tendency to focus disproportionately on
one aspect of a situation, object or event—particularly self-
imposed or imaginary barriers
[15]. Only one primary
study explicitly investigated ﬁxation; it found that framing
desiderata as ”requirements” leads to more fixation on those
desiderata than framing them as a less-structured list of
”ideas” [P19].

1

l

Endowment effect

1
2

3
2
3

3
l
2
T
0022390052
02204157

l

1
2
5

4.3.2
Confirmation bias
The tendency to pay more attention to information that con-
ﬁrms our beliefs affects many areas of SE. For example, due
to confirmation bias, software professionals tend to be unre-
alistically positive about the completeness and correctness
of search—queries for retrieving information from archived
software documentation. Professionals tend to only search
familiar areas of documentation, confirming their existing
Views [P13].
Conﬁrmation bias also affects trade off studies (a practice
in which a multidisciplinary team evaluates alternative so-
lutions against multiple criteria). Participants tend to ignore
results that do not confirm their preconceived ideas [P37].
Similarly, developers tend to resist exploring major design
changes necessary for accommodating change requests that
include new or conﬂicting requirements [P18].
Meanwhile, conﬁrmation bias in software testing in-
creases production defects [P4],
[P6]. Conﬁrmation bias
explains the tendency of software testers to design and run
more tests that conﬁrm the expected execution of a program
rather than ones that could reveal the failures [P31], [P32].
During debugging, confirmation bias sometimes leads pro-
grammers to misidentify the reasons for program failure
[P32].

1

1

Mere
effect
info.
information
of
effect

3

l
3

l

1
6

/

1
4

Selective
Semantic
Semmetweis reﬂect
Status
Sunk cost
Time-based
slence effect
effect

l

1

l
3

1

1

l

1

Fig. 2. Cognitive Biases Investigated in SE Knowledge Areas

stubbornness and myopia.

4.3
What effects of cognitive biases are investigated?
Although the primary studies investigate 37 cognitive bi-
ases, they only consider the effects of eleven (Table 9). This
section discusses each in turn.

4.3.3
Hyperbolic discounting
Hyperbolic discounting is the tendency to prefer smaller
rewards in the near future over larger rewards later on
[67]. One primary study argues hyperbolic discounting
leads software professionals to prefer quick-fixes and simple
refactoring over better but more ambitious revisions [P36].

Bias
Effects
Knowledge area

Incorrect beliefs about the completeness and correctness of answers or solutions [P13]
Maintenance
Insufﬁciently exploring code when dealing with a change request [P18]
Construction
Rejecting results and measurements that do not support the analyst’s beliefs [P37]
Design
Conﬁrmation
Higher defect rate [P4]
Testing
More post—release defects [P6]
Tesﬁng
Misidentifying causes of program failure [P32]
General
Unrealistic trials of SE tools or techniques [P26]
Tesﬁng
Runnin'g more tests that show a system works than tests that ﬁnd problems [P31], [P32]
Testing

Reusing SQL queries introduced errors in the new context [P2]
Construction
Anchoring
Design errors and adding unnecessary functionality [P42]
Design
and
Reduced long-term productivity [P51]
Management
adjustment
Ignorance change requests [P17]
Construction
Inaccurate effort estimation [P64]
Design

Ignoring unfamiliar and less-used keywords and locations while searchin'g documentation [P13]
Maintenance
Availability
Relying on memorable past experiences that are inconsistent with the current system [P17]
Design
Misrepresenting code features [P32]
General

Representativeness
Dropping error-producing test cases [P7]
Quality
Misrepresenting code features [P32]
General

Overconﬁdence
Insufﬁcient effort in requirements analysis [P3]
Requirements
Overall software development failures [P3]
General

Hyperbolic
Neglecting refactoring and maintenance for short-term gains [P36]
Design
discounting

Framing and
Reduced creativity in high—level design [P19]
Requirements
ﬁxation

Attentional
Misunderstanding UM'L class diagrams [P28]
Design

Miserly infor-
Uncritically agreeing to a client’s requirements [P21]
Requirements
mation processing

Bandwagon effect
Uncritically agreeing with a team leader’s suggestions [P21]
General

Status quo
Illogical defense of previous decisions [P21]
General

results in an inefﬁcient search of the required information,
as individuals’ (available) experience might not always be
consistent with the current state of the software [P13], [P17].
Availability bias is associated with over-representation
of memorable code features and certain controversies such
as preferring a familiar but less suitable programming lan-
guage [P32].

or how they led to ignoring the surface semantics. Therefore,
”attentional bias” may not be the best explanation for this
phenomenon (see also Section 5.2).

4.3.7
Representativeness

Representativeness bias is the tendency to make a judgment
by ﬁtting an object into a stereotype or model based on
very few properties [36]. Representativeness may explain
why "test cases that produce errors may be overlooked
[which] leads to an increase in software defect density” [P7,
p. 5]. Similarly, representativeness may explain why certain
”notable features of the code base are judged as frequent,
even if they are notable for reasons other than frequency”
[P32, p. 59].

4.3.5
Fixation and framing effect
The framing effect is the tendency to react differently to
situations that are fundamentally identical but presented

(i.e., "framed”) differently. One primary study argued that
framing dubious desiderata as ”requirements” leads to
undue ﬁxation on the desiderata, consequently reducing
design creativity [P19].

4.3.6
Attentional bias

4.3.9
Overconfidence bias
One primary study suggests overconﬁdence leads profes-
sionals to neglect requirements analysis, leading to a su-
perﬁcial or incorrect understanding of the situation at hand
[P3]. Similarly, project managers are often overconﬁdent in
their time and resource estimation for projects, which can
lead to outright project failure [P3]. However, myriad biases
including conﬁrmation bias, miserly information processing
and anchoring may contribute to poor understanding of
problematic situations and poor estimation (see Section 5.2).

4.4.3
Anchoring and adjustment bias
Anchoring bias is especially problematic during effort es-
timation, which is a special case of forecasting. Forecast-
ing is an area of intense study in the operations research
community; however, this review only covers SE research.
Still, forecasting can be divided into expert-based (i.e., based
on human judgment) and model-based (i.e., based on a
mathematical model). Since anchoring—and—adjustment only
occurs in expert-based forecasting, adopting model-based
forecasting can be considered a debiasing technique (with
the catch that these models are subject to statistical bias and
variance) [P53], [P63]. However, model-based forecasting
often requires information that is not available in software
projects, so several suggestions for debiasing expert-based
effort estimation have been proposed.
For example, planning poker—an estimation technique
where participants independently estimate tasks and simul-
taneously reveal their estimates, was proposed to prevent
anchoring on the ﬁrst estimate [P38]. Analogously, generat-
ing multiple design candidates may help avoid anchoring
on a preconceived solution [P33]. However, the research on
group estimation from multiple anchors is mixed (cf. [70] for
a summary), and we are not aware of any research investi-
gating how multiple design candidates affect anchoring.
Some primary studies argue that anchoring on an initial
estimate can be mitigated by explicitly questioning software
project managers via different facilitators (project members
or stakeholders). The resulting knowledge sharing should
help project managers avoid anchoring their initial estimates
on prior experience or self—assessments [P65], [P63].
One study [P37] suggested raising awareness about an-
choring bias. While such weak interventions are unlikely to
help [45], asking directed questions (discussed next) may be
more effective [P3].

4.4
What debiasing approaches are investigated?
One primary study speculates that some techniques—
bumdown charts, bottom-up planning, product demonstra-
tions, daily team meetings, ﬂexible planning, and stake-
holder feedback—may guard against numerous biases
[P63]. Others propose speciﬁc debiasing techniques (Table
10). While debiasing techniques concentrate on only six of
the 37 cognitive biases investigated, some of these may
generalize to a larger family of similar or interrelated bi-
ases. However, none of the primary studies provide strong
empirical evidence for the effectiveness of debiasing tech-
niques. All the techniques discussed in this section are
untested suggestions.

4.4.1
Availability bias

Bias
Debiasing technique
Knowledge area

Traceability [P17], [P18]
Design, Construction
Directed questions [P3]
Requirements
Anchoring
Planning poker [P38]
Management
and
Generating multiple solutions [P33]
Design
adjustment
Increasing awareness of the bias, warning participants, disregarding initial anchors or status
Design
quo [P37]
Statistical prediction methods [P53]
Process
Technical competence and explicit questioning by facilitators [P65]
Management

Appropriate documentation [P13]
Management
Traceability [P17], [P16]
Design, Construction
Availability
Framing information to highlight problematic areas [P32]
General
Maintaining detailed records [P53]
Process
Participatory retrospective decision-making meetings [P65]
Management
Stakeholder feedback and expert involvement [P63]
Management

Overoptimism
Directed questions [P3]
Requirements
and
Planning poker [P62]
Management
overconﬁdence
Double—loop learning [P45]
Management
Appropriately framing estimation questions [P47]
Management

Traceability [P16]
Construction
Conﬁrmation
Explicitly exploring disconﬁrmatory evidence [P32]
General
Generating multiple solutions [P37]
Design

Representativeness
Training, retrospectives, warning about biases, and explicitly asking for alternate solutions
Process
[P53]
Maintaining a consistent user interface [P20]
Requirements

Another primary study argues that Planning Poker helps
practitioners mitigate optimism [P62]. However, planning
poker does not explicitly encourage converging on more
realistic (or pessimistic) estimates. It seems more plausible
that the range of estimates would mitigate overconfidence.
Another technique for mitigating overconfidence bias
is double-loop learning [P45]. This involves encouraging in-
dividuals and organizations to engage in self—reﬂective
learning by explicitly confronting initial assumptions and
developing more appropriate ones.
Meanwhile, one primary study found that the framing of
estimation questions affects optimism. Speciﬁcally, asking
”How much effort is required to complete X?” provided
less optimistic estimates than asking, ”How much can be
completed in Y work hours?” [P47]. Focusing on tasks
(rather than time periods) could therefore be considered a
debiasing technique.

TABLE 11
Frequently Used Research Methods

Research method

# Primary studies

Experiment
Case study
Think-aloud protocol analysis
Interview
Grounded theory
Survey
Other approaches

\iwmwmmwO

4.5
What research methods are used?

Table 11 summarizes research methods used most fre-
quently to investigate cognitive biases in SE. Most of the em-
pirical studies employed laboratory experiments. Predom-
inately qualitative research approaches (e.g. case studies)
are underrepresented. Nine empirical papers reported mul-
tiple studies, of which seven reported multiple experiments
while two adopted a multimethodological approach.
Other approaches include studies that either used preex-
isting data sets (e.g. archived data from company records or
project documents) or did not report sufﬁcient details about
the research method to classify.

4.4.5
Representativeness

Several non-evaluated techniques for mitigating the effects
of representativeness are proposed, as follows:

4.6
When were the articles published?

10

Number of Primary Studies

1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020

Years

Fig. 3. Publication Trend until 2016

found in 2016. There could be additional 2016 studies that
were not indexed at the time of the search (in December,
2016).

4.7
Where were the articles published?

Table 12 shows the most common publication outlets. Arti-
cles are scattered across many outlets, with 58% in journals
or academic magazines, and the rest in conferences, work-
shops or symposiums. The outlet with the most articles (5)
is Journal of Systems and Software.

4.8
Who is conducting the research?

To investigate the most proliﬁc authors, we ranked all 109
authors by the number of publications in the sample. Of
these, 81 authors had one paper; 16 authors had two papers;
and eight authors had three papers. Four authors stand
out with ﬁve or more primary studies (Table 13). Magne
Jorgensen is clearly the most proliﬁc author working in
this area. Some of the authors that feature in the table are
frequent collaborators; for instance, Calikli and Bener co-
authored eight publications, while Jargensen and Molokken
collaborated on four.

4.9
Which SWEBOK knowledge areas are targeted by
research on cognitive biases?

To answer RQ9, we categorized the primary studies using
the knowledge areas speciﬁed in the Software Engineering
Body Of Knowledge [71], as shown in Table 14. The most
frequently investigated knowledge area is SE management
in 21 primary studies, followed by software construction
and software design investigated in 12 and 11 primary
studies respectively. Many critical knowledge areas includ-
ing requirements, design, testing and quality are under-
represented.

5
DISCUSSION

TABLE 12
Publication Outlets

Source Avenue
# Primary Studies

Journal of Systems and Software
Journal of Software
Systems Engineering Conference
International Conference on Software Engineering
Information and Software Technology Journal
Empirical Software Engineering Journal
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
Communications of the ACM
Information Systems Journal
International Conference on Information Systems
International Conference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
Psychology of Programming Interest Group Workshop
Information 8: Management Journal
Advanced information systems engineering Journal
International Journal of Project Management
European Conference on Cognitive Science
AI Magazine
Americas Conference on Information Systems
Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering
Document Engineering (Symposium)
European Conference on Information Systems
European Software Process Improvement
IASTED International Conference on Software Engineering
Information Systems Management Journal
Information Systems Research Journal
International Conference on Electronics, Communications and Computers
International Conference on Information Science and Technology
International Conference on Information, Business and Education Technology
International Conference on Intelligent user interfaces
International Workshop on Emerging Trends in Software Metrics
Journal of Association for Information Systems
Journal of Visual Languages
Management Science Journal
Proceedings of AGILE conference
Research in Systems Analysis and Design: Models and Methods Journal
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems
Science of Computer Programming Journal
Software Quality Journal
Transaction on Professional Communication Journal
Ubiquity Journal
Workshop on a General Theory of Software Engineering (GTSE)
International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering
International Conference on Human—Computer Interaction

b—li—‘b—li—\b—li—\>—|i—‘b—li—\b—IHD—li—‘b—IHHi—‘b—li—‘b—li—‘D—li—‘b—li—‘b—li—‘Hi—‘HNNNNNNNNNNWWWU‘I

TABLE 13
Cognitive biases investigated by top SE researchers

Researcher
#
Primary
Cognitive biases investigated
Knowledge area
studies

Jelrgensen
13
Optimism, conﬁdence, anchoring and adjustment, hindsight, wishful
Management, construction,
thinking, impact, selective perception, representativeness, availability,
general
misleading information
Bener
8
Conﬁrmation, representativeness, availability, anchoring and adjust-
Construction,testing
ment
Calikli
8
Conﬁrmation, representativeness, availability, anchoring and adjust-
Construction,testing
ment
Molekken
5
Conﬁdence, anchoring and adjustment, optimism
Management, construction,
general

OOOOOt—lt—lt—lt—IOJVV

extent in cognitive psychology) suffers from widespread
confusion, which we address in the next subsection.

To address these areas of confusion, we offer suggestions
to both researchers and editors. For researchers, applying
theories from reference disciplines to new contexts is often
difﬁcult. Skimming a single article or Wikipedia entry is not
sufficient to understand a cognitive bias or psychological
theory. Depending on the theory and researcher, it may
be necessary to take courses in cognitive psychology or
conduct an extensive literature review. Finding a mentor
or collaborator with a strong background in the bias or
theory is also wise. (We discussed aspects of this paper
with three different professors of psychology to make sure
that our interpretations are reasonable and our nomencla-
ture correct). Meanwhile, editors faced with a manuscript
applying a theory from a reference discipline to SE should
consider inviting a review from someone with a strong
background in that theory or reference discipline, even if
they are in another discipline. This practice can be modeled
after statistical review in medical journals (cf. [81]).

5.2
Widespread confusion
Analyzing many of the primary studies was hindered by
several interconnected problems.
Some biases are deﬁned inconsistently between studies.
Some biases have multiple names (e.g. system justification
is the same as status-quo bias). Some ostensibly different
biases are extremely similar, or likely just the same underly-
ing cognitive process manifesting in different circumstances.
For example, when we get preoccupied with a number, it is
called anchoring bias [22]. But when we get preoccupied with
a default option, it is called default bias [69]. We call preoccu-
pation with presentation theframing eﬁ‘ect [2]. Preoccupation
with information that supports our beliefs is conﬁrmation
bias [75], while preoccupation with the typical use of an
object isfunctionalﬁxedness [76]. Preoccupation with the ﬁrst
few items in a list is primacy, while preoccupation with
current conditions is status quo bias. If we better understood
attention and perception, we might not need all these terms
to explain what people attend to.
Meanwhile, the primary studies reviewed here attempt
to apply concepts from a social science discipline to an
applied science context, which is often quite different from
the context in which those concepts originated. Communica-
tion across scientific communities can be difﬁcult, and some
miscommunication is normal [77].
These problems lead to several points of confusion:

5.3
Implications for SE practice

The most important takeaways of this research for practi-
tioners are as follows:

1)
Planning poker to prevent anchoring bias in effort
estimation [P38].
2)
Reference class forecasting or model-based forecast-
ing to mitigate optimism in effort estimation [P45].
3)
Ontology—based documentation to mitigate avail-
ability bias [P13].
4)
Directly asking for disconﬁrmatory evidence to re-
duce conﬁrmation bias [P32].
5)
Generating multiple, diverse problem formulations
and solution candidates to mitigate framing effects
[P53].
6)
Using conﬁrmation bias metrics to select less—biased
testers [P6].
7)
For security, employing independent penetration
testing specialists to reduce conﬁrmation bias [83].
8)
Designating a
devil’s advocate in retrospective
meetings to avoid groupthink [84].

5.5
Limitations

The ﬁndings of this research should be considered in light
of several limitations.
The concept of cognitive biases is not without problems:
”the explanations of phenomena via one-word labels such
as availability, anchoring, and representativeness are vague,
insufﬁcient, and say nothing about the processes underlying
judgment” [85, p. 609]. Most cognitive biases ”have been
studied in complete isolation without any reference to the
other ones
thus resembl[ing] an archipelago spread out
in a vast ocean without any sailor having Visited more than
one (or at the most two) of the small islands yet.” [86, p. 399].
Cognitive biases do not constitute a comprehensive theory
of reasoning; they are more like a set of empirical generaliza-
tions regarding common reasoning problems. Except, many
of the problems seem related, and both their relationships
and causes are mysterious. Synthesizing research based on
cognitive biases is therefore epistemologically fraught.
Furthermore, inconsistent terminology in the primary
studies, as discussed in Section 5.2, impedes analysis. The
analyst must constantly question whether what is said is
what is meant. This extra layer of interpretation creates
additional possibilities for errors.
Our search string may have missed relevant studies pub-
lished in computer science outlets. Further relevant studies
may not be indexed by the databases we searched. Limit-
ing our search to ’computer science’ or similar categories
(see Table 2) may have excluded relevant studies in other
domains (e.g. a study of a cognitive bias in an SE context
published in a psychology journal). ’ We used several tactics
to improve external validity, as explained in Section 3.5):

5.4
Implications for SE education
Reasoning can be debiased through extensive training [45].
What would constitute extensive training varies depending
on the bias.
For example, extensive training in effort estimation
might consist of estimating thousands of user stories, with
immediate and unambiguous feedback. This is probably im-
practical, especially considering the great variety of software
projects and the domain knowledge necessary to estimate
tasks accurately.
In contrast, extensive training in design creativity might
be more practical. For example, consider an assignment
where students have to design a suitable architecture for
a given teaching case using UML. Now suppose students
are instead asked to design four alternative architectures,
all of which should be reasonable and quite different from
each other. Or, suppose students are asked to design just
two architectures, one uncontroversial and one radical. If
most design—related assignments throughout their degrees
call for multiple alternatives, generating several design can-
didates will seem natural. Students are thus more likely to
carry this practice into their professional work, much like
the programming styles and testing practices taught today.
Implementing all the alternatives is unnecessary.
Whether and how to teach the theory of cognitive biases
or particular debiasing techniques is another matter. Rather
than teaching it as a stand-alone topic, it may be more
efﬁcient to explain many cognitive biases in the context of
common problems and practices.
For example, a common topic in software project man-
agement courses is effort estimation. The instructor shares
empirical research on poor effort estimation and the damage

1)
we employed backward snowballing on reference
lists of primary studies;
2)
we analyzed the proﬁles of most prolific authors to
check if we have missed any relevant studies;
3)
being well versed with this topic, we discussed as
a group whether we knew of any relevant studies
that were suspiciously absent from sample;
4)
we analyzed the ﬁrst 150 results of the same search
on Google Scholar;
5)
we searched the for the names of some speciﬁc
cognitive biases.

is, many studies do not refer to previous SE research
on the same bias, or conceptualize the bias in the
same way.

1)
understanding the social and cognitive processes (in
software development) from which cognitive biases
emerge;
2)
measuring the effects of speciﬁc biases in speciﬁc
contexts to see what’s practically important;
3)
adapting existing debiasing approaches for software
engineering contexts, and developing new ones;
4)
empirically evaluating the effectiveness of debiasing
techniques.

In summary, cognitive biases help to explain many com-
mon problems in SE. While they are robust against sirn-
ply raising awareness, professionals can often be debiased
through simple interventions. The better we understand the
theoretical foundations of common problems and practices,
the easier it will be to develop effective interventions to
mitigate biases and therefore alleviate their corresponding
problems. Ultimately, we hope that this literature review
will encourage many SE researchers to further explore the
phenomena of cognitive biases in SE and thus will serve as
a basis for future research.

Each of these lines of inquiry require different kinds
of studies. Qualitative studies, including case studies [87],
grounded theory [88] and protocol studies [89], [90] are
well suited to understanding social and cognitive processes.
Meanwhile, because software engineering success is so mul-
tifaceted [91], sophisticated statistical modelling is needed to
estimate the effects of a speciﬁc bias. Creating new debiasing
approaches and adapting existing ones for software contexts
is engineering research in the sense that the research seeks to
invent a useful artifact. The debiasing artifacts can be eval-
uated using controlled experiments [92] or action research
[93].
Meanwhile, we need a better classiﬁcation of cognitive
biases. We found that some biases are difﬁcult to classify in
Fleischmann et al.’s [16] taxonomy—some appear related
to multiple categories; others do not fit in any category
(Section 4.1). Better organizing cognitive biases according to
their causal mechanisms, the nature of their effects or their
specific manifestations in software projects would facilitate
reasoning about biases and possibly inform debiasing tech-
niques.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the associate editor and
three anonymous reviewers for their suggestions on earlier
versions of this paper. This study was supported in part by
the Infotech Oulu Doctoral grant at University of Oulu to
Rahul Mohanani and Iﬂaah Salman.

REFERENCES

6
CONCLUSION

This study provides a comprehensive view of research on
cognitive biases in software engineering. It identiﬁes 65
primary studies exploring 37 cognitive biases, organized
into eight categories. The most investigated cognitive biases
belong to interest and stability biases, whereas, the class of
social and decision biases are least investigated. A constant
and sustained interest in this area is clear, especially in
software project management. Substantial opportunities for
impactful research remain not only in other areas (e.g. de-
sign, testing, and devops) but also considering other biases
(e.g. selective perception, input bias and priming effect).
Some of the key findings of this paper are:

[10]

[11]

[13]

[36]

J. Parsons and C. Saunders, ”Cognitive heuristics in software en-
gineering applying and extending anchoring and adjustment to
artifact reuse,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 30,
no. 12, pp. 873—888, 2004.
D. Amott, ”Cognitive biases and decision support systems devel-
opment: a design science approach,” Information Systems journal,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 55—78, jan 2006.
P. Ralph, ”Introducing an Empirical Model of Design,” in Pro-
ceedings ofThe 6th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems.
Limassol, Cyprus: AIS, Sep. 2011.
M. Fleischmann, M. Amirpur, A. Benlian, and T. Hess, ”Cognitive
Biases in Information Systems Research: a Scientometric Analy-
sis,” ECIS 2014 Proceedings, no. 26, pp. 1—21, 2014.
A. P. Sage and W. B. Rouse, Handbook of systems engineering and
management.
I. Wiley {8:} Sons, 1999.
C. E. Zsambok and G. Klein, Naturalistic decision making.
Psy-
chology Press, 2014.
C. R. B. de Souza, H. Sharp, J. Singer, L.-T. Cheng, and G. Venolia,
”Guest Editors’ Introduction: Cooperative and Human Aspects
of Software Engineering,” IEEE Software, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 17—19,
nov 2009.
G. M. Weinberg, The psychology ofcomputer programming.
Dorset
House Pub, 1998.
D. Arnott and G. Pervan, ”Eight key issues for the decision
support systems discipline,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 44,
no. 3, pp. 657—672, 2008.

[37]

[14]

[38]

[15]

[39]

[16]

[40]

[17]

[41]

[18]

[42]

[19]

[43]

[20]

[44]

[21]

[45]

[22]

J. Parsons and C. Saunders, ”Cognitive heuristics in software en-
gineering applying and extending anchoring and adjustment to
artifact reuse,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 30,
no. 12, pp. 873—888, dec 2004.
W. Stacy and I. MacMillan, ”Cognitive bias in software engineer-
ing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 57—63, jun
1995.
T. Hall, N. Baddoo, S. Beecham, H. Robinson, and H. Sharp,
"A systematic review of theory use in studies investigating the
motivations of software engineers,” ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1—29, may 2009.

[46]

[23]

[47]

[24]

[48]

[49]

[25]

S. Cruz, F. Q. B. da Silva, C. V. F. Monteiro, C. F. Santos, and M. T.
dos Santos, ”Personality in software engineering: preliminary
ﬁndings from a systematic literature review,” in 15th Annual
Conference an Evaluation {8} Assessment in Software Engineering
(EASE 2011).
IET, 2011, pp. 1—10.
D. E. Leidner and T. Kayworth, ”Review: a review of culture
in information systems research: toward a theory of informaﬁon
technology culture conﬂict,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 2, pp.
357—399, 2006.

[50]

[26]

[51]

[27]

P. Lenberg, R. Feldt, and L. G. Wallgren, ”Behavioral software en-
gineering: A deﬁnition and systematic literature review,” journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 107, pp. 15—37, 2015.
G. Calikli and A. Bener, ”Preliminary analysis of the effects of
conﬁrmation bias on software defect density,” in Proceedings of
the 2010 ACM—IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement - ESEM ’10.
New York, New York,
USA: ACM Press, 2010, p. 1.
E. Kutsch, H. Maylor, B. Weyer, and J. Lupson, ”Performers,
trackers, lemmings and the lost: Sustained false optimism in fore-
casting project outcomes
Evidence from a quasi-experiment,”
International Journal ofProject Management, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1070—
1081, 2011.
B. Flyvbjerg and Bent, ”From Nobel Prize to Project Management:
Getting Risks Right,” eprint arXiv:1302.3642, feb 2013.
M. Jargensen, ”Identiﬁcation of more risks can lead to increased
over—optimism of and over-conﬁdence in software development
effort estimates,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 52,
no. 5, pp. 506—516, 2010.

[52]

[28]

[53]

[54]

[29]

[55]

P. A. Laplante and P. A., What every engineer should know about
software engineering.
Taylor 8: Francis, 2007.

[30]

[56]

[31]

[57]

[32]

[58]

[59]

[33]
[34]

J. Klayman and Y.-W. Ha, ”Conﬁrmation, disconﬁrmation, and
information in hypothesis testing.” Psychological review, vol. 94,
no. 2, p. 211, 1987.
M. Nurminen, P. Suominen, S. Ayréimé, and T. Kéirkkﬁinen,
”Applying Semiautomatic Generation of Conceptual Models to
Decision Support Systems Domain.”
M. R. Leary, ”Hindsight Distortion and the 1980 Presidential
Election,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 257—263, jun 1982.

[86]

[62]

[87]

[63]

[88]

[89]

[64]

J. A. O. G. da Cunha,
F. Q. B. da Silva, H.
P. de Moura,
and F. J. S. Vasconcellos, ”Decision-making in software project
management,” in Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on
Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering - CHASE
’16.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 26—32.
E. Long-Crowell, ”The halo effect: deﬁnition, advantages 8: dis-
advantages,” Psychology, vol. 104, 2015.
H. R. Arkes and P. Ayton, ”The sunk cost and concorde effects:
Are humans less rational than lower animals?” Psychological
bulletin, vol. 125, no. 5, p. 591, 1999.
R. J. Wirfs-Brock, ”Giving Design Advice,” IEEE Software, vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 13—15, jul 2007.
Y.
Bar—Haim,
D.
Lamy,
L.
Pergamin,
M.
J.
Bakermans-
Kranenburg, and M. H. van I]zendoorn, ”Threat-related atten-
tional bias in anxious and nonanxious individuals: A meta-
analytic study.” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 133, no. 1, pp. 1—24,
jan 2007.
W. Samuelson and R. Zeckhauser, ”Status quo bias in decision
making,” journal of Risk and Uncertainty, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 7—59,
mar 1988.
G. Whyte and J. K. Sebenius, ”The effect of multiple anchors
on anchoring in individual and group judgment,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, vol. 69, no.
1, pp. 75
— 85, 1997. [Online]. Available:
science/article/pii/SO749597896926746
A. Abran, ]. Moore, P. Bourque, R. Dupuis, and L. Tripp, ”Soft-
ware engineering body of knowledge,” IEEE Computer Society,
Angela Burgess, 2004.
P. Ralph and P. Kelly, ”The dimensions of software engineering
success,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering - ICSE 2014.
New York, New York, USA:
ACM Press, 2014, pp. 24—35.

[90]

[91]

[65]

[66]

[92]

[67]

[93]

[68]

[94]

[95]

[69]

[96]

[70]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[71]

[100]

[101]

[72]

I. Hughes and S. Parkes, ”Trends in the use of verbal protocol
analysis in software engineering research,” Behaviour é? Informa—
tion Technology, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 127—140, 2003.
D. Dunning, ”The dunning—kruger effect: On being ignorant of
one’s own ignorance,” in Advances in experimental social psychol-
ogy.
Elsevier, 2011, vol. 44, pp. 247—296.
R. S. Nickerson, ”Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon
in many guises.” Review ofgeneral psychology, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 175,
1998.
T. McCaffrey, ”Innovation relies on the obscure: A key to over-
coming the classic problem of functional ﬁxedness,” Psychological
science, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 215—218, 2012.
T. S. Kuhn, The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions.
Chicago press, 2012.
R. Buehler, D. Grifﬁn, and M. Ross, ”Exploring the” planning
fallacy”: Why people underestimate their task completion times.”
journal of personality and social psychology, vol. 67, no. 3, p. 366,
1994.

[73]

[102]

[103]

[74]

[104]

[75]

[105]

[76]

[106]

[77]

University of

[78]

[107]
[108]

[79]

[109]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

Anchoring and ad-
Stability
"The tendency, in formm'g perceptions or making quantitative judg—
P1, P2, P7, P10, P11, P16,
justment bias
ments of some entity under conditions of uncertainty, to give excessive
P17, P18, P20, P22, P30, P33,
weight to the initial starting value (or anchor), based on the ﬁrst received
P34, P37, P38, P42, P43, P47,
information or one’s initial judgment, and not to modify this anchor
P49, P51, P53, P56, P57, P60,
sufﬁciently in light of later information” [39, p. 51]. Adjustment bias is a
P63, P64, P65
psychological tendency that inﬂuences the way people intuitively assess
probabilities [36].

Attentional bias
Perception
The tendency of our perception to be affected by our recurring thoughts
P28, P40
[68].

Availability bias
Pattern-
Availability bias refers to a tendency of being inﬂuenced by the informa-
P7, P10, P11, P13, P16, P17,
recognition
tion that is easy to recall and by the information that is recent or widely
P18, P23, P29, P32, P37, P39,
publicized [40].
P43, P60, P63, P64, P65

Bandwagon effect
Social
”The tendency for large numbers of individuals, in social and sometimes
P21, P22
political situations, to align themselves or their stated opinions with the
majority opinion as they perceive it” [39, p. 101].

Belief perseverance
Stability
”The tendency to maintain a belief even after the information that
P22
originally gave rise to it has been refuted or otherwise shown to be
inaccurate” [39, p. 112].

(Over)
conﬁdence
Action—
The tendency to overestimate one’s own skill, accuracy and control over
P3, P16, P20, P37, P41, P45
bias
oriented
one’s self and environment [62].

Confirmation bias
Interest
The tendency to search for, interpret, focus on and remember informa-
P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, P9, P10,
tion in a way that conﬁrms one’s preconceptions [94].
P12, P13, P14, P16, P17, P18,
P20, P21, P26, P27, P30, P31,
P32, P36, P37, P39, P43, P44,
P55, P64

Contrast effect
Perception
The enhancement or reduction of a certain perception’s stimuli when
P36
compared with a recently observed, contrasting object [95].

Default bias
Stability
The tendency to choose preselected options over superior, unselected
P22
options [69].

Endowment effect
Stability
”The tendency to demand much more to give up an object than one is
P25
willing to pay to acquire it” [96]; i.e., when someone values something
more just because they own it.

Fixation
Pattern-
The tendency to disproportionately focus on one aspect of an event,
P19
recognition
object, or situation, especially self-imposed or imagmary' obstacles [97].

Framing effect
Perception
”The tendency to give different responses to problems that have surface
P19, P20, P64
dissimilarities but that are really formally identical” [2]

Halo effect
Perception
The halo effect can be defined as the tendency to use global evaluations
P35, P63
to make judgments about speciﬁc traits [65].

Hindsight bias
Memory
When people know the actual outcome of a process, they tend to regard
P49, P57, P60, P63
that outcome as having been fairly predictable all along—or at least
more predictable than they would have judged before knowing the
outcome [63].

Hyperbolic
Decision
The tendency of people to prefer options that offer smaller rewards with
P36
discounting
more immediate pay—off to options with larger rewards promised for
future [67].

IKEA
effect
/
I-
Interest
The tendency for people to ascribe greater value to items that they have
P25
designed—it—myself
created, designed or assembled [62].
effect

Impact bias
Action-
Impact bias is the tendency for people to overestimate the length or the
P49, P57
oriented
intensity of future feeling states [98].

Information bias
Other
The tendency to request unnecessary or unhelpful information, espe-
P10, P15, P36
cially in times of uncertainty [66].

Infrastructure bias
Decision
The location and availability of preexisting infrastructure such as roads
P37
and telecommunication facilities inﬂuences future economic and social
development [99].

Invincibih'ty bias
Action—
The tendency to over trust one’s own abilities [99].
P37
oriented

Mere
exposure
ef-
Pattern
”Increased liking for a stimulus that follows repeated, unreinforced
P22, P63, P65
fect
recognition
exposure to that stimulus" [100, p. 31].

Neglect of probabil-
ity
Normalcy effects

The tendency to disregard probability during decision-making [102].

P36

Decision

The tendency to systematically ”underestimat[e] the probability or ex-
tent of expected disruption” during a disaster” [59].

P22

Action-
oriented

(Over)
bias
optimism

The tendency to be over—optimistic, overestimating favorable and pleas-
ing outcomes [102].

P22, P24, P31, P45, P46, P48,
P50, P51, P52, P54, P57, P58,
P59, P61, P62

Action-
oriented

Primacy
and
recency effects

Perception

The tendency to remember the first and last few items in a sequence
more than those in the middle [67].

P36

Representativeness

Other

The tendency to reduce many inferential tasks to simple similarity
judgments [36].

P7, P29, P32, P43, P53, P60

Perception

P60

Selective perception

The tendency for different people to perceive the same events differently.
[95].

Semantic fallacy

Perception

The tendency to pay less attention to the semantics of model than to its
syntax or structural constrains (especially when they conﬂict) [103].

P40

Semmelweis reﬂex

Unthinking rejection of new information that contradicts established
beliefs or paradigms [104].

P22

Pattern
recognition

Status-quo
bias
/
System justiﬁcation

Stability

The tendency to irrationally prefer, maintain and defend current condi-
tions, operating procedures, status, or social order [105].

P21, P22, P37

P63

Sunk cost bias

Sunk cost bias is the tendency to invest more future resources in a
situation in which a prior investment has been made, compared to a
similar situation in which a prior investment has not been made [66].

Decision

TiIne-based bias

Memory

TiIne-based bias involves a reduction of attention via short—term think-
ing and hyperbolic discounting errors [106], [107].

P30, P36

P22

Valence effect

The tendency to give undue weight to the degree to which an outcome
is considered as positive or negative when estimating the probability of
its occurrence [108].

Interest

Validity effect

”The validity effect occurs when the mere repetition of information
affects the perceived truthfulness of that information, and appears to
be based on recognition memory and may be an automatic process. The
validity effect occurs similarly for statements of fact that are true and
false in origin, as well as political or opinion statemen
” [109, p. 211].

P22

Interest

P22, P49, P57

Wishful thinking

The tendency to underestimate the likelihood of a negative outcome and
vice versa [40].

Interest

[P22]

P. Ralph, ”Toward a theory of debiasing software development,"
in EuroSymposium on Systems Analysis and Design.
Springer, 2011,
pp. 92—105.

[P1]

G. Allen and ]. Parsons, ”Is query reuse potentially harmful? an-
choring and adjustment in adapting existing database queries,"
Information Systems Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 56—77, 2010.
G. Allen and B. ]. Parsons, ”A little help can be a bad thing:
Anchoring and adjustment in adaptive query reuse," ICIS 2006
Proceedings, p. 45, 2006.
G. ]. Browne and V. Ramesh, ”Improving information require-
ments determination: a cognitive perspective," Information 8
Management, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 625—645, 2002.
G. Calikli and A. Bener, ”Empirical analyses of the factors
affecting confirmation bias and the effects of confirmation bias
on software developer/tester performance," in Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Predictive Models in Software
Engineering.
ACM, 2010, p. 10.
G. Calikli, A. Bener, and B. Arslan, ”An analysis of the effects of
company culture, education and experience on confirmation bias
levels of software developers and testers," in Proceedings of the
32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering—
Volume 2.
ACM, 2010, pp. 187—190.
G. Calikli, A. Bener, T. Aytac, and O. Bozcan, ”Towards a metric
suite proposal to quantify confirmation biases of developers," in
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 2013 ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 363—372.
G. Calikli, A. Bener, B. Caglayan, and A. T. Misirli, ”Modeling
human aspects to enhance software quality management,” in
Thirty Third International Conference on Information Systems, 2012.
G. Cahkh and A. B. Bener, ”Inﬂuence of confirmation biases of
developers on software quality: an empirical study," Software
Quality journal, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 377—416, 2013.
G. Calikli and A. Bener, ”An algorithmic approach to missing
data problem in modeling human aspects in software devel-
opment," in Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Predictive Models in Software Engineering.
ACM, 2013, p. 10.
N. Chotisarn and N. Prompoon, ”Forecasting software damage
rate from cognitive bias in software requirements gathering
and specification process," in Information Science and Technology
(ICIST), 2013 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 951—
956.
N. Chotisarn and N. Prompoon, ”Predicting software damage
rate from cognitive bias in software design process," in Proceed—
ings of the 2013 International Conference on Information, Business and
Education Technology (ICIBET 2013).
Atlantis Press, 2013.

[P23]

]. E. Robbins, D. M. Hilbert, and D.
F. Redmiles, ”Software
architecture critics in argo," in Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on Intelligent user interfaces.
ACM, 1998, pp. 141—144.
E. Shalev, M. Keil, ]. S. Lee, and Y. Ganzach, ”Optimism bias in
managing it project risks: A construal level theory perspective,”
in European conference on information systems (ECIS), 2014.
O.
Shmueli,
N.
Pliskin,
and
L.
Fink,
”Explaining
over-
requirement in software development projects: an experimental
investigation of behavioral effects,” International journal of Project
Management, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 380—394, 2015.

[P2]

[P24]

[P3]

[P25]

[P4]

[P26]

F. Shull, ”Engineering values: From architecture games to agile
requirements," IEEE Software, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 2—6, 2013.

[P5]

[P27]

F. Shull, ”Our best hope," IEEE Software, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 4—8,
2014.
K. Siau, Y. Wand, and
I. Benbasat, ”The relative importance
of structural constraints and surface semantics in information
modeling," Information Systems, vol. 22, no. 2-3, pp. 155—170, 1997.
B. G. Silverman, ”Critiquing human judgment using knowledge-
acquisition systems," AI Magazine, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 60, 1990.
E. D. Smith and A. Terry Bahill, ”Attribute substitution in sys-
tems engineering," Systems engineering, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 130—
148, 2010.
L. M. Leventhal, B. M. Teasley, D. S. Rohlman, and K. Instone,
”Positive test bias in software testing among professionals: A re-
view," in International Conference on Human—Computer Interaction.
Springer, 1993, pp. 210—218.
W. Stacy and ]. MacMillan, ”Cognitive bias in software engineer-
ing," Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 57—63, 1995.
A. Tang, ”Software designers, are you biased?" in Proceedings of
the 6th International Workshop on SHArihg and Reusing Architectural
Knowledge.
ACM, 2011, pp. 1—8.
A. Tang and M. F. Lau, ”Software architecture review by associa-
tion," journal of Systems and Software, vol. 88, pp. 87—101, 2014.

[P28]

[P6]

[P29]

[P30]

[P7]

[P31]

[P8]

[P32]

[P9]

[P33]

[P10]

[P34]

[P35]

P. Tobias and D. S. Spiegel, ”Is design the preeminent protagonist
in user experience?" Ubiquity, vol. 2009, no. May, p. 1, 2009.
R. ]. Wirfs-Brock, ”Giving design advice," IEEE Software, vol. 24,
no. 4, 2007.
E. D. Smith, Y. ]. Son, M. Piattelli-Palmarini, and A. Terry Bahill,
”Ameliorating mental mistakes in tradeoff studies," Systems Eh—
giheerihg, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 222—240, 2007.
N. C. Haugen, ”An empirical study of using planning poker for
user story estimation," in Agile Conference, 2006.
IEEE, 2006, pp.
9—pp.
A. ]. K0 and B. A. Myers, ”A framework and methodology for
studying the causes of software errors in programming systems,"
journal of Visual Languages 8 Computing, vol. 16, no. 1-2, pp. 41—
84, 2005.
K. Siau, Y. Wand, and I. Benbasat, ”When parents need not have
Children - cognitive biases in information modeling," in Inter—
national Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering.
Springer, 1996, pp. 402—420.

[P11]

[P36]

[P37]

[P12]

P. Conroy and P. Kruchten, ”Performance norms: An approach to
rework reduction in software development," in Electrical 8 Com—
puter Engineering (CCECE), 2012 25th IEEE Canadian Conference
on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1—6.
K. A. De Graaf, P. Liang, A. Tang, and H. Van Vliet, ”The impact
of prior knowledge on searching in software documentation,” in
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM symposium on Document engineering.
ACM, 2014, pp. 189—198.

[P38]

[P39]

[P13]

[P14]

[P40]

]. DeFranco-Tommarello and F. P. Deek, ”Collaborative problem
solving and groupware for software development," Information
Systems Management, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 67—80, 2004.

[P15]

[P41]

S. Chakraborty, S. Sarker, and S. Sarker, ”An exploration into
the process of requirements elicitation: A grounded approach,”
journal of the association for information systems, vol. 11, no. 4, p.
212, 2010.

[P16]

[P42]

[P17]

[P18]

[P43]

[P44]

[P19]

[P20]

[P45]

[P47]

[P48]

[P49]

[P50]

[P51]

[P52]

[P53]

[P54]

[P55]

[P56]

[P57]

[P58]

[P59]

[P60]

[P61]

[P62]

[P63]

]. A. O. G. da Cunha and H. P. de Moura, ”Towards a substantive
theory of project decisions in software development project-
based organizations: A cross-case analysis of it organizations
from brazil and portugal," in Information Systems and Technologies
(CISTI), 2015 10th Iberian Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1—6.
H. van Vliet and A. Tang, ”Decision making in software archi-
tecture," journal of Systems and Software, vol. 117, pp. 638—644,
2016.

[P64]

[P65]

]. A. 0. da Cunha, F. Q. da Silva, H. P. de Moura, and F. ]. Vas-
concellos, ”Decision-making in software project management: A
qualitative case study of a private organization,” in Proceedings of
the 9th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of
Software Engineering.
ACM, 2016, pp. 26—32.