Michel A. Kinsy, Mihailo Isakov, Alan Ehret, Donato Kava
Adaptive and Secure Computing Systems Laboratory
Boston University, Boston, USA

varying application needs. They further highlighted that adaptive
systems require few additional transistors. Recently, Hoffmann et
al. [4] presented the Self-aware Computing (SEEC) model where
application goals could be implemented to help guide the runtime
system execution. The proposed architecture framework builds on
these research efforts and insights.

Abstract— In this work, we introduce a Self-Aware Polymorphic
Architecture (SAPA) design approach to support emerging context-
aware applications and mitigate the programming challenges caused by
the ever-increasing complexity and heterogeneity of high performance
computing systems. Through the SAPA design, we examined the salient
software-hardware features of adaptive computing systems that allow
for (1) the dynamic allocation of computing resources depending on
program needs (e.g., the amount of parallelism in the program) and
(2) automatic approximation to meet program and system goals (e.g.,
execution time budget, power constraints and computation resiliency)
without the programming complexity of current multicore and many-
core systems. The proposed adaptive computer architecture framework
applies machine learning algorithms and control theory techniques to the
application execution based on information collected about the system
runtime performance trade-offs. It has heterogeneous reconﬁgurable
cores with fast hardware-level migration capability, self-organizing mem-
ory structures and hierarchies, an adaptive application-aware network-
on-chip, and a built-in hardware layer for dynamic, autonomous resource
management. Our prototyped architecture performs extremely well on a
large pool of applications.

III. SELF-AWARE POLYMORPHIC ARCHITECTURE (SAPA)
DESIGN

arXiv:1802.05100v1 [cs.AR] 12 Feb 2018

For a computing system to automatically and dynamically adapt
to program execution constraints, goals and phases, it needs to
sense hardware states (a way to gather runtime system information),
monitor program execution phases, and make complex decisions
based on built-in execution rules. SAPA extends the conventional
multicore/many-core architecture three-layer design approach, con-
sisting of processing elements, memory subsystems and the on-chip
data communication logic with a fourth layer, i.e., the intelligence
fabric (IF) or nervous system (NS) layer. This new distributed
introspection and reconﬁguration architectural layer is the central
conceptual innovation of the SAPA design methodology and enables
continuously autonomous adaptation for performance, reliability, and
energy efﬁciency. Figure 2 illustrates the SAPA computing archi-
tecture stack. It has a fast hardware-level migration capability at the
cores, self-organizing memory structures and hierarchies, an adaptive
and quality-of-service aware network-on-chip, and the built-in NS
layer for dynamic, autonomous resource management.

I. INTRODUCTION

The current design approach in multicore or many-core com-
puter systems presents application programmers with a great deal
of challenges due to their ever-increasing complexity [1]. Unlike
frequency-scaling where performance is increased equally across the
board, core-scaling pushes the burden of harnessing this additional
processing power on the application or software programmer [2]. To
make optimal use of the system components, programmers must ﬁrst
learn about system parameters and how to best leverage them for
a given application. This approach requires time, effort, and often
leads to suboptimal application performance in terms of execution
time or power. Furthermore, it has become evident that better data
processing capabilities are needed to extract meaningful insights
from large-scale data [1]. Exhaustive or deterministic executions of
these extreme-scale applications are increasingly too expensive under
current systems in terms of power and execution time. Figure 1 de-
picts the desired trade-off choices to adequately target new emerging
applications.

Self-Monitoring Reconfigurable

Migratory Cores

Intelligence Fabric

Intelligence Fabric

Self-Organizing
Memory Structures

Adaptive Polymorphic

On-chip Interconnect

Accuracy
Precision
Performance
Determinism

Trading

Fig. 2.
Illustrative architectural stack of self-Aware Polymorphic Architec-
tures (SAPA).

For

Time
Power
Reconfiguration
Probabilistic

The new set of architectural layers for the SAPA stack are:

• Self-Aware Polymorphic Execution Cores (SAPEC): process-
ing elements (PEs) that dynamically adapt and optimize their
execution behavior according to a set of high-level program
goals.

To endure

∆Veracity
∆Velocity
∆Variety
∆Volume

Enabling forward-based
Big Compute / Big Data

Real-time
changing inputs

Power availability
variations

Mission changes &
faults

• Approximation-Aware
Memory
Organization
Models
(AMOM): smart, self-adjusting distributed memory structures
that use hardware counters for online execution pattern learning
and correctness estimation.

Fig. 1.
Salient desired adaptation range in new computing systems.

II. RELATED WORK

• Resilient Adaptive Intelligent Network-on-Chip (RAIN):
routers that address runtime network trafﬁc load imbalances and
reliability problems in network-on-chip design in the presence
of faults.

Applica2on'Programmer'

System'Programmer'

Kernels'&'
Opera2ng'

Execu&on)

So2ware)

Program'

Goals)))
Speciﬁca&ons)

Code'

System''

Code'

…

Subsystem 1
Subsystem N
Subsystem 2

PE) R)

PE) R)

PE) R)

Node)

I)
M)

I) M)

Application Environment ∆
Operating Environment ∆

RM)

RM)

RM)

∆Power
∆Real-time
∆Data Variety

∆Data Velocity

Re)
Mo)

M)

Re)
Mo)

Node)

Re)
Mo)

Hardware)

Interpreter & Analyzer 1
Interpreter & Analyzer 2
Interpreter & Analyzer K
…

PE):)Processing))
))))))))Element)
R:))))On>Chip)Router)
M:)))Memory))
Mo/Re:)Monitor/)
))))))))Reconﬁg)Units)
I:))))))Intelligent))
))))))))Execu&on)Unit)
RM:)Distributed))
))))))))Reconﬁg)Mgr)

PE) R)

PE) R)

PE) R)

Adaptation Strategies

I) M)

I)
M)

I) M)

…

Strategy 1
Strategy L

RM)

RM)

RM)

Node)

Execution Manager

Fig. 4.
Conceptual view of the autonomous adaptive execution model.

Fig. 3.
Self-Aware Polymorphic Architecture (SAPA) system.

IV. EVALUATIONS

Figure 3 shows a concrete implementation overview of the archi-
tecture: 1) processing elements, 2) a distributed memory subsystem,
3) an interconnection network, and 4) sensing, monitoring, and
reconﬁguration hardware components (the intelligent sensing and
monitoring components are indicated in red). The novel intelligence
layer, the nervous system (NS), is composed of the distributed
intelligent execution unit (I) and reconﬁguration manager (RM).
Given a program, its decomposition, and its performance targets
(e.g., power, latency), the system dynamically allocates computational
resources (PEs) depending on the amount of parallelism in the pro-
gram, memory footprint, and data communication routing overhead.
The dynamic mapping of the program can take different shapes
depending on the number of processing elements (or maximum
allowed simultaneously active processing elements due to power
budget) on the architecture, current local network congestion, and
data dependencies between tasks over time. The on-chip network of
active processing elements expands and contracts dynamically during
runtime depending on the program execution needs and performance-
power targets. Other novel features of the architecture include (1) the
use of neighbor cores for rehearsal of decisions, (2) having non-global
cache coherence for scalability and adaptability, and (3) creating a
framework for parent-child model of data replication.
The following steps demonstrate program execution on the de-
signed SAPA system. Sample execution scenario:

To evaluate the proposed SAPA design, we hand-annotated Betke
et al. [5] Fast Object Recognition in Noisy Images Using Simulated
Annealing algorithm and ran it using the Heracles [6] design tool
with some architectural changes. Figure 5 shows how these types of
iterative algorithms lend themselves well to user-deﬁned or context-
aware execution time to accuracy or power to accuracy trade-offs.
For this application, moving from 85% to 98% matching conﬁdence
level triples the power consumption and the compute time. While
in some cases a 98% matching conﬁdence level may be required,
the extra compute cost may not be justiﬁable under other operating
circumstances.

4x4-Core SAPA System Execution Profile

4x4-Core SAPA System Execution Profile

7

8

Total Power Consumption (W)

Compute Time (109 cycles)

6

6

5

4

4

3

2

2

1

0

0
50
70
85
98

50
70
85
98

Object Identification Accuracy

Object Identification Accuracy

Fig. 5.
Fast object recognition application execution.

REFERENCES