Performance Scheduler

Jiong Du, Fei Hu, Du Xu
Key Laboratory of Optical Fiber Sensing and Communications, Ministry of Education,

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, P. R. China

then downloading the microcode to underlying devices to
meet requests of packets. However, since packet processing
functions supported by data plane become more and more
complicated,
P4
and
its
corresponding
programmable
architecture gradually show limitations in some scenarios,
such as highly dynamic flows, new functions’ deploy of P4
cannot meet the changing rate. In addition, as Tofino still
utilizes pipeline structure with programmable functions of
its action stages, it also suffers from the problem of poor
resource utilization.

Abstract—With the rapid development of network-based
services and applications, current network nodes’ data plane
solutions, which focus on packets forwarding traditionally, are
not optimally addressing new requirements such as function
flexibility, performance scalability and resource utilization, etc.
In this paper, we propose a novel data plane structure called
Resource Pooling Switch Architecture (RPSA), which utilizes
global shared resource pool to provide different processing
functionalities and capacities to different packets/flows. As all
network functions are instantiated by the resources connected to
the switching fabric and constructed in the form of Service
Function Chains (SFC), the traffic patterns changed a lot. We
design Balanced Service Capacity based FIRM algorithm (BSC-
FIRM) to overcome the deficiencies of classical scheduler in
RPSA. Simulation results show that our algorithm outperforms
on the aspect of packet switching delay and loss rate compared
with FIRM and iSLIP algorithm.

On
the
other
hand,
ideas
of
Network
Function
Virtualization
(NFV)
[3-6]
and
SFC
provide
important
inspiration
for
the
flexible
customization
and
function
expansion of the data plane. Based on general computing
platform, such as x86 servers and Linux, Virtualized Network
Functions (VNFs) are instances running on virtual machines or
containers with specified purposes. Eliminating the restrictions
of enclosed “black-box”, new network functions are able to be
developed quickly and deployed flexibly with the help of NFV,
and the corresponding resources would also be allocated on-
demand. On the users’ viewpoint, both an end-to-end routing
path and a set of ordered VNFs deployed along the path
construct a SFC, which could satisfy the user requests instead
of all functions being integrated in one node. But for pursuing
multiplex gain which leads to high resource utilization,
different flows may share one VNF instance belonging to
different SFCs. As the burst nature of network traffic, the VNF
distributed across nodes may be working under light load or
heavy load, which causes the processing delay to change
frequently and drastically. This makes it unpractical to predict
and control the end-to-end flow performances, such as delay,
jitter and loss rate, which usually influence the end users’
quality of experience (QoE) a lot [7].

Keywords—Switch
Architecture,
Scheduling
Algorithm,
Network Function Virtualization, Service Function Chain

I.
INTRODUCTION

The endless new emerging network-based services and
applications need the underlay network evolve accordingly, but
so many different traffics are hosted by today’s IP network and
all serviced in the best-effort manner in part of their end-to-end
paths. The design principles of traditional enclosed network
nodes, simple and fast, make it focus on the forwarding
performance
but
hardly
consider
the
newly
coming
requirements.

It is quite easy to point out many deficiencies of the “black
box”, here we only consider two aspects – inflexibility and
poor resource utilization. For the inflexibility, we cannot add
new functions required into the box easily as the fast running
pipeline structure of line-card implemented by ASIC or NP
(network processor) which is not opened to user or third party,
and we need many different middle-boxes connected around
the nodes to support new functions. For the poor resource
utilization, we cannot tailor the processing capacity of the line
card to fit different traffic classes as all packets pass all the
stages of the pipeline. That means some function modules in
the pipeline process the packets, but do no contribution,
wasting processing resource absolutely.

In this paper, we propose RPSA architecture to solve the
problems mentioned above. Based on SFCs constructed from
the sharing resource pool, this architecture will provide flexible
and customized network functions for data plane of network
nodes. We design a classifier in the line card of RPSA to divide
the packets
into
different
types by
rule matching
and
encapsulates the packets that need to be processed through the
sharing resource pool to identify the service function paths.
The scheduler performs one or more packet scheduling on all
packets to realize network function processing and switching
forwarding in RPSA.

To address above problems, P4 (Programming Protocol-
Independent Packet Processors) was proposed with a high-
level language applied to program the data processing
behavior of data plane [2]. With P4, users could program
network functionalities directly by coding, compiling and

To find out an efficient packet scheduling in RPSA, as
different types of flows and the corresponding SFCs processed
in sharing resource pool leading the traffic to be varied and

The remaining of this paper is organized as follows:
Section Ⅱintroduces the RPSA architecture. Section Ⅲ
describes the design of BSC-FIRM algorithm and section Ⅳ
presents experiment and analysis of simulation results. Finally,
section Ⅴconcludes the paper with generalizing our mainly
contributions and perspectives to future work.

In RPSA, NFP, Classifier and Scheduler are core modules
which we will introduce in detail.

A. NFP

As mentioned above, Each computing nodes in NFP has
several Network Function Instances (NFIs), which are VNFs
running on servers through NFV. Each NFI is connected by
software
switch
or
control
modules
within
nodes.
By
centralizing those NFIs, NFP can manage all network functions
easily and provide a range of flexible and customized services
based on users’ requests in the form of SFC.

II.
NODE ARCHITECTURE

In traditional network node, any packet arriving at it goes
through all the functions in the pipeline of line card whether
functions are necessary or not, such as ACL, Load Balance,
NAT, etc. After that, the packet is scheduled from input to
output port of the switch fabric, then leaves the node’s ports.

Instead of forwarding to the output ports determined by its
destination address directly, such MAC or IP, the packet finds
its SFC firstly in RPSA if needed, which is done by the
Classifier, and then is handled with the corresponding SFC
located in Network Function Pool (NFP). Compared with the
classical architecture, the RPSA separates specified functions
from line cards’ pipeline and allocates them in NFP to provide
flexible processing for packets. The block diagram of RPSA is
shown in figure 1.

Certainly, there exist some problems if NFIs are placed and
managed unproperly in NFP. For example, some SFC consists
of several NFIs that may run on many different servers, which
results in a large increase in packets processing delay and
ineffective transmissions of links between switch fabric and
NFP that causes a decline in system throughput. So an optimal
placement in NFP should make a SFC goes through as few
servers as possible. In this paper, we adopt MFMTP algorithm
in [9] to solve the problem of network function placement.

B. Classifier

The Classifier separates the input packets according to pre-
defined rules, which are based on statistics and prediction to
the traffic. The whole rules can be described as Forward
Information Base (FIB) and NFI State Table in detail. FlB
mainly indicates information of SFC and output TPort; NFI
State Table indicates information of NFI Index, Queue Length
and Function Description. So the ordinary packets, which only
need to be forwarded to the output ports, are tagged with
TPorts’ number based on FIB; the peculiar packets, which need
specific functions process, are tagged with the FPorts’ number
and ordered NFI index based on deployment strategy.

Fig.1 Block Diagram of RPSA

C. Scheduler

In RPSA, we adopt the well-known VOQ based switching
structure as the fabric. The ports of the fabric can be
distinguished as two types, one is Transport Port (TPort) and
the other is Function Port (FPort).

The Scheduler in RPSA is different from the traditional
one. Besides scheduling packets from input to output port, it
also provides NFI management and corresponding Service
Function Path (SFP) management. The working mechanism of
Scheduler is as shown in figure 2.

TPorts connect to the line card and support user traffic IO.
But here the line card is simplified to only support MUST-DO
Functions and Classifier. Composed of Ingress Pipeline and
Egress Pipeline, MUST-DO Functions include some essential
network functions in line card, like integrity and legality
verification
to
filter
out
invalid
packets.
Classifier
is
responsible
for
dividing
packets
into
different
types
corresponding to different SFCs by rule matching.

FPorts connect to the NFP and each of them is a standard
physical port connecting to x86 server. The number of FPorts
is in accordance to the number of computer nodes in NFP. By
centralizing specified VNFs running on virtual machines or
containers through visualizing x86 servers NFP makes it
easier to provide various and dynamic network functions for
switch data plane.

Fig.2. Mechanism of Scheduler

SFP management means that Scheduler assigns SFP for
packets according to current state of NFI and SFC. As each
server in NFP has an Agent to interact with Scheduler through
out-of-band channel, Scheduler could obtain real-time state and

Packet
scheduling
refers
to
that
scheduler
solves
competition for switch fabric by matching input and output
ports to the most extent, so as to make rational use of network
resources, reduce latency and improve throughput. In RPSA,
the
goal
of
packet
scheduling
is
to
achieve
efficient
transmission between input ports and output ports and good
performance under different traffic models. We will discuss the
scheduling algorithm in detail in chapter 3.

In conclusion, The whole packet processing in RPSA is as
following.
Firstly,
packet
goes
through
all
MUST-DO
functions when it arrives at the ingress line card. Then,
Classifier
matches
packet header
with
FIB updated
by
Scheduler to get corresponding SFP. If the SFP is empty and
the next hop is not Drop, the packet queues the VOQ of
destination output TPort and waits to be scheduled. If the SFP
is not empty and the next hop is not Drop, Classifier tags the
packet with unique header in accordance to SFP, which leads
packet to get specified network functions handled. After that,
packet queues in VOQ of assigned output FPort when packet
gets all specific network function processed in NFP. Finally,
Scheduler matches packet header with FIB again to get output
TPort pointed by next hop and schedule the packet to leave the
switch.

Fig.3. Different SFC processing

So RPSA needs an efficient algorithm to address packet
scheduling
of
non-uniform
traffic
to
ensure
efficient
transmission between input and output ports so as to maximize
the performance of switch. Aiming at input-queued switch,
there exist some classic scheduling algorithms like iSLIP[14]
and FIRM[8] and many other recent studies. For example,
Selective Request Round Robin (SRRR) algorithm expands
phases one iteration to four [15]. Literature [16] modulates
PIM and iSLIP algorithm to realize two-phase iteration.
RR/LQF algorithm adds one more bit to identify whether prior
VOQ is empty or not [17]. Although there are a great many
packet scheduling algorithms, some of them still need to be
optimized, especially in non-uniform traffic model. In this
paper, based on iteration scheduling and its representative
FIRM algorithm, we propose BSC-FIRM algorithm to solve
the problem of non-uniform traffic scheduling in RPSA
architecture.

Compared with traditional switch architecture and P4,
RPSA outperforms in at least following aspects:

Processing capacity and rules for packets can be flexibly
and
dynamically
changed.
As
specified
network
functions are provided by NFP, the composition and
strategy could adjust according to users’ requests.

Resource
utilization
can
be
improved.
By
deep
programming for network functions, efficient recycling
and reusing of existing resources, RPSA could obviously
improve resource utilization.
In addition to bringing advanced and flexible network
functions to data plane, different from classical SFC, RPSA
also focuses on the performance of the whole system, which
includes network function placement that has been addressed
in literature [9], and the scheduling problem brought by traffic
classification and NFP that will be discussed in next section.
By studying these issues, we will realize the completely closed
loop of management and scheduling of switch nodes. As far as
we know, the current studies only take some sub-problems
into account [10-13].

A. FIRM algorithm

FIRM is a Maximal Size Matching (MSM) algorithm based
on iterative scheduling [8]. It has been demonstrated that the
performance of FIRM is slightly better than that of iSLIP [14]
under high load conditions. In FIRM algorithm, each input and
output port has a strategy pointer RRI and RRO respectively.
Both of them point to highest priority of each port, which could
help to match and update strategies. In each iteration, FIRM
algorithm adopts three phases of Request - Grant - Accept to
complete a maximal size match between the input and output
port. It has been proved that FIRM has good performance for
uniform traffic. However, when it comes to non-uniform traffic,
FIRM still treats and schedules each VOQ equally even though
the input rate of each VOQ is different, which leads to longer
queuing delay and increasing loss rate.

III.
PACKET SCHEDULING

Under the condition of multi-user competing for shared
network
resources,
especially
for
switch
fabric,
it
is
unavoidable to lead to contention and even blocking, which
will seriously affect the performance of switch. So for each
switch architecture, efficient packet scheduling algorithm is a
powerful guarantee to ensure the performance of the whole
system.

B. Service Capacity

We propose BSC-FIRM algorithm based on FIRM to solve
the packet scheduling of RPSA in this paper. In BSC-FIRM,
we define Service Capacity (SC) as an important index to
quantize the state of each queue in packet scheduling. The SC

RPSA is no exception and even more complicated in
scheduling, because part of flows need to enter NFP and get

Firstly, We define VOQi,j as VOQ whose input port is i and
output port is j and Leni,j as queuing length of VOQi,j. In
addition, Ti,j , described by timeslot, represents the latest time
that VOQi,j is scheduled. The relationship between VOQ and
SC is as following:

If Leni,j is greater than Leni,k, the SC value of VOQi,j is
less than that of VOQi,k;

If Leni,j equals to Leni,k and Ti,j is less than Ti,k, the SC
value of VOQi,j is less than that of VOQi,k ;

If Leni,j equals to Leni,k and Ti,j equals to Ti,k, the SC
value of VOQi,j equals that of VOQi,k .
Figure 4 shows the state of VOQ in the two input ports at a
given time. According to the definition of SC metioned above,
we get SCi,j < SCi,k and SCx,m < SCx,n. For each VOQ, the
smaller the value of SC, the more packets accumulated in
queue or longer time distance from the latest scheduling is,
which is less likely to hold new packets. Therefore, scheduling
algorithm should give priority to VOQ with smaller value of
SC, which leads SC to be more balanced.

Fig.5(a). Three Phases of The First Iteration

Fig.4. Comparison between SC

Fig.5(b). Three Phases of The Second Iteration

C. BSC-FIRM Algorithm

It has been proved that the time complexity of FIRM
algorithm is
)
(
2
N
O
and N is the number of ports of switch.
Compared with FIRM algorithm, BSC-FIRM adds strategy
selection of input port pointer based on comparing SC at
Request phase of first iteration, which could be finished within

The basic idea of BSC-FIRM algorithm is that the strategy
pointer RRI of each input port points to the output port
corresponding to the VOQ with the minimum SC in the first
iteration of each scheduling. Namely, the input port gives
priority to the signal sent by the output port in accordance to
the VOQ with minimum SC. If there is more than one VOQs
with minimum SC, random selection strategy would be
adopted to balance SC of all VOQs. Therefore, Each iteration
of BSC-FIRM algorithm performs following three phases:

Request: All unmatched input ports send Request to
unmatched output ports corresponding to non-empty
VOQ. If it is the first iteration of the scheduling, strategy
pointer RRI of the input port would point to the output
port corresponding to the VOQ with the minimum SC,
and if there is more than one VOQ with minimum SC,
RRI would select one of them randomly.

Grant: The unmatched output ports find and send Grant

(lg
)
O
N . As updating strategies at Grant and Accept are in line
with those of FIRM algorithm, the overall time complexity of
BSC-FIRM algorithm is
2
(
lg
)
O N
N

. Considering the balanced
direction each VOQ moves during scheduling, BSC-FIRM
algorithm could perform better in aspects of delay and packet
loss rate than FIRM algorithm when it is non-uniform traffic.
From analysis of time complexity above, we know that the
performance improvement attained by BSC-FIRM algorithm is
not at too much time cost.

IV.
SIMULATION

A. Environmental setup

signal to input port that is closest to Grant pointer RRO
according to round-robin strategy and, at the same time,
sends Reject signal to other input ports.

Accept: After receiving Grant signal, the unmatched
input port also sends Accept signal to output port which
is closet to pointer RRI according to round-robin strategy
and try to establish a match. When match successes in
the first iteration, RRI points to next output port that has
set up matching port. In terms of those output port that
has sent Grant signal yet not been matched, RRO points
to input port which has not accepted Grant.
Figure 5 shows an example to illustrate the iteration process
of BSC-FIRM algorithm. As shown in figure 5(a) and figure

In order to evaluate the performance of BSC-FIRM
algorithm, we simulate it under three different traffic models
and compare the result with that of FIRM and iSLIP algorithm.
In this paper, we adopt 32x32 switch fabric, among which,16
ports are TPort and 16 ports are FPort. The most common SFC
proposed in literature [10] including NAT, FW, IDS and VPN
is adopted in this paper and the number of deployed NFIs that
each NF need is calculated according to the load of NF that
includes total traffic arriving at NF, remaining resource of each
server and load balance. The network function placement at the
granularity of NFI could refer to our another paper [9].. By
modulating the total traffic entering the RPSA, namely link
load, we could test the performance of three algorithms. The

In the experiment, we consider three classic traffic models--
uniform, burst and hotspot. Considering the characteristics of
RPSA architecture, we simulate and compare BSC-FIRM with
FIRM and iSLIP [8] under the three traffic models as following:

Uniform-Uniform: Flows of each sub-SFC and direct

switching distribute uniformly among sending hosts.
Destination addresses also distribute uniformly among
receiving
hosts.
Each
packets
arrives
according
to
Bernoulli process.

Uniform-Hotsport: Flows of each sub-SFC distribute

Fig.6. Performance Comparison Under Uniform-Uniform Traffic

uniformly among sending hosts. Destination addresses
distribute uniformly among receiving hosts. Flows of
direct switching adopts hotspot traffic model. For input
port i, the possibility that packets are sent to hotspot
host (i+N/2)mod N is 0.5, so as with the possibility of
being sent to other non-hotspot hosts.

Butst-Burst: Flows of each sub-SFC and direct switching
distribute uniformly among sending hosts. Destination
addresses also distribute uniformly among receiving hosts.
Each packets arrives according to the burst process (ON-
OFF). Namely, the destination addresses of all packets of
the same burst is the same and destination addresses of
different burst obey uniform distribution.
Following
two
indexes
are
used
to
measure
the
performance of algorithms:

Delay -- In this simulation, delay refers to queuing delay,

The performance of three algorithms under Uniform-
Hotspot traffic model is shown in figure 7. From it we could
get that when the load rate is greater than 0.8, especially
between 0.825 and 0.9, BSC-FIRM has greater improvement
than iSLIP and FIRM algorithm in delay and packet loss rate.
In terms of load rate where packet loss appears, as shown in
figure 7(b), BSC-FIRM algorithm makes an increase of 7.5%
compared with iSLIP and FIRM and also decreases 83.7% and
81.9% respectively in the aspect of packet loss rate. This is
because BSC-FIRM algorithm gives matching priority to VOQ
with minimum SC, leading to packets sent to hotspot host get
scheduled in time, which could effectively decrease queuing
delay and packet loss rate.

because only this kind of delay is decided by packet
scheduling algorithm. Suppose that the total number of
cells switched in given time is N, and the time that cell
queues in VOQ is Di. Then average delay could be
described as:

N




i
i
average
delay
D

1
_


Packet Loss Rate -- When VOQ buffer has been
exhausted, the newly arrived cells will be dropped.
Suppose that sending hosts send N cells and M cells of
them are discarded. Then the packet loss rate is:

(a). Delay
(b). Packet Loss Rate

Fig.7. Performance Comparison Under Uniform-Hotspot Traffic

_
M
drop
rate
N


B. Simulation Results and analysis

Figure 6 depicts the performance of three algorithms under
Uniform-Uniform traffic model. As shown, there is no packet
loss in this model for three algorithm and no big gap between
them until load rate increases up to 0.95, where average delay
of BSC-FIRM decreases 10.9% and 10.5% compared with
iSLIP algorithm and FIRM algorithm respectively. This is
because Uniform-Uniform traffic is the most ideal model in
RPSA architecture and three algorithms could implement
scheduling within the allowable range of the VOQ buffer.
While with the increase of load rate, the influence of partial

(a). Delay
(b). Packet Loss Rate

Fig.8. Performance Comparison Under Burst-Burst Traffic

Figure 8 shows the performance of three algorithms under
Burst-Burst traffic model. From the two pictures, we know that

[1]
N Feamster, J Rexford, E Zegura. “The road to SDN.” Queue, 2013,
11(12): 20.
[2]
P Bosshart, D Daly, G Gibb, M Izzard,, N Mckeown, J Rexford et al.
“P4: Programming protocol-independent packet processors.” ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 2014, 44(3): 87-95.
[3]
B Han, V Gopalakrishnan, L Ji , S Leee. “Network function
virtualization: Challenges and opportunities for innovation.” IEEE
Communications Magazine, 2015, 53(2): 90-97.
[4]
R Jain, S Paul. “Network virtualization and software defined networking
for cloud computing: a survey,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 2013,
51(11): 24-31.
[5]
J Matias, J Garay, N Toledo, J Unzilla, E Jacob. “Toward an SDN-
enabled NFV architecture.” IEEE Communications Magazine, 2015,
53(4): 187-193.
[6]
Z Bronstein, E Roch, J Xia, A Molkho. “Uniform handling and
abstraction of NFV hardware accelerators.” IEEE Network, 2015,
29(3):22-29.
[7]
S Clayman, E Maini, A Galis, A Galis, A Manzalini, N Mazzocca. “The
dynamic placement of virtual network functions,” Network Operations
and Management Symposium, Krakow, Poland, 2014:1-9.
[8]
D N Serpanos, P I Antoniadis. “FIRM: A class of distributed scheduling
algorithms for high-speed ATM switches with multiple input queues,”
Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and
Communications Societies, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2000, 2: 548-555.
[9]

[10] S Palkar, C Lan, S Han, K Jang, A Panda, S Ratnasany, et,al. “E2: a

From analyzing the simulation results we could conclude
that for different traffic models in RPSA architecture, BSC-
FIRM algorithm performs better than iSLIP and FIRM
algorithm in average queuing delay and packet loss rate during
packet
scheduling.
Therefore,
the
BSC-FIRM
algorithm
proposed in this chapter has relatively great potential in
applications.

V.
CONCLUSION

In this paper, first of all, we design a switch architecture
called RPSA that separates specified functions from line card
and provides flexible processing to packets in the form of NFP.
This architecture is highly flexible to realize a more intelligent
data plane and could assign network functions and resources
according to users’ requests. Then, considering the switching
performance of this architecture, we propose BSC-FIRM
algorithm to address packet scheduling under different traffic
models. Simulation results show that BSC-FIRM outperforms
iSLIP and FIRM algorithm in aspect of average delay and
packet loss rate.

framework for NFV applications,” Proceedings of the 25th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles, ACM, 2015: 121-136.
[11] S Clayman, E Maini, A Galis, A Manzalini, N Mazzocca. “The dynamic

placement of virtual network functions,” Network Operations and
Management Symposium, Krakow, Poland, 2014: 1-9.
[12] Q Zhang, Y Xiao, F Liu, C.S L John, G Jian, W Tao. “Joint

Optimization of Chain Placement and Request Scheduling for Network
Function Virtualization,” Distributed Computing Systems, IEEE 37th
International Conference, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2017: 731-741.
[13] R Cohen, L Lewin-Eytan, J S Naor, D Raz. “Near optimal placement of

As perspectives for future work, First of all, we plan to
realize collaboration and control between multiple switch
nodes. For one thing, in large-scale networking, such as 3-
Clos, network function processing between different switch
nodes could collaborate and been flexibly controlled to
provide resource reservation and path configure in advance
for some traffic with high priority. For another, we plan to
introduce the logically centralized control framework like
SDN to our architecture so that the whole system will have
two levels of data plane capabilities to facilitate the flexible
and various bussiness orchestration. Secondly, due to the
simulation of this paper, applying RPSA architecture and
BSC-FIRM algorithm in practice is also a main task in
future research.

virtual network functions,” Computer Communications, 2015 IEEE
Conference, Kowloon, Hong Kong, 2015: 1346-1354.
[14] N McKeown. “The iSLIP scheduling algorithm for input-queued

switches,” IEEE, ACM transactions on networking, 1999, 7(2): 188-201.
[15] D Lin, Y Jiang, M Hamdi. “Selective-request round-robin scheduling for

VOQ packet switch architecture,” 2011 IEEE International Conference,
Kyoto, Japan, 2011: 1-5.
[16] B Hu, K L Yeung, Z Zhang. “Minimizing the communication overhead

of iterative scheduling algorithms for input-queued switches,”. Global
Telecommunications Conference, Kathmandu, Nepal, 2011: 1-5.
[17] B Hu, K L Yeung, Q Zhou, C He. “On Iterative Scheduling for Input-

Queued
Switches
With
a
Speedup
of
$2-1/N$,”
IEEE
ACM
Transactions on Networking, 2016, 24(6): 3565-3577.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by the National 863 Plan
Program under Grant 2015AA016102.