Eﬀect of dilution in asymmetric recurrent neural
networks$,$$

arXiv:1805.03886v1 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 10 May 2018

Viola Follia, Giorgio Gostia,∗, Marco Leonettia,c, Giancarlo Ruoccoa,b

aCenter for Life Nanoscience,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161, Rome, Italy
bDepartment of Physics,
Sapienza University of Rome,
Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy
cCNR NANOTEC-Institute of Nanotechnology c/o Campus Ecotekne,
University of Salento, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy

Abstract

We study with numerical simulation the possible limit behaviors of synchronous

discrete-time deterministic recurrent neural networks composed of N binary

neurons as a function of a network’s level of dilution and asymmetry. The net-

work dilution measures the fraction of neuron couples that are connected, and

the network asymmetry measures to what extent the underlying connectivity

matrix is asymmetric. For each given neural network, we study the dynami-

cal evolution of all the diﬀerent initial conditions, thus characterizing the full

dynamical landscape without imposing any learning rule. Because of the deter-

ministic dynamics, each trajectory converges to an attractor, that can be either

a ﬁxed point or a limit cycle. These attractors form the set of all the possible

limit behaviors of the neural network. For each network we then determine the

$This is the author version of the work.
This is the accepted manuscript ver-
sion of the article published in Neural Network Journal.
Published journal article link:

$$Please cite this article as:
Folli,
V.,
Gosti,
G.,
Leonetti,
M.,
Ruocco,
G.,
Ef-
fect of dilution in asymmetric recurrent neural networks.
Neural Networks
(2018),

©2018.
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY 4.0 license.

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: (Viola Folli), (Giorgio
Gosti), (Marco Leonetti),
(Giancarlo Ruocco)

Preprint submitted to Neural Networks
May 11, 2018

convergence times, the limit cycles’ length, the number of attractors, and the

sizes of the attractors’ basin. We show that there are two network structures

that maximize the number of possible limit behaviors. The ﬁrst optimal net-

work structure is fully-connected and symmetric. On the contrary, the second

optimal network structure is highly sparse and asymmetric. The latter opti-

mal is similar to what observed in diﬀerent biological neuronal circuits. These

observations lead us to hypothesize that independently from any given learn-

ing model, an eﬃcient and eﬀective biologic network that stores a number of

limit behaviors close to its maximum capacity tends to develop a connectivity

structure similar to one of the optimal networks we found.

Keywords:
Recurent neural networks, McCulloch-Pitts neurons, Memory

models, Maximum memory storage

1. Introduction

Recurrent neural networks are able to store stimuli-response associations,

and serve as a model of how live neural networks store and recall behaviors as

responses to given stimuli. A discrete-time deterministic recurrent N binary-

neuron neural network is completely characterized by its N 2 edges, and its

instantaneous state is deﬁned by a neuron activation vector σ, which is a binary

vector of size N. In this paper, we consider a speciﬁc kind of recurrent neural

network, which is initialized, analogously to a Hopﬁeld network, by assigning

to the network’s neurons an initial pattern which is the the network stimulus

or input. The collection of all possible neuron activation vectors contains 2N

allowed vectors σ, these vectors can be partitioned in three categories: steady

states, limit cycles, and transient states. Steady states are neuron activation

states that do not change in time, and limit cycles are sequences of neuron

activation vectors that repeat cyclically, with a period that we call cycle length.

From now on, we will consider a steady state as a limit cycle of length 1. A

network, given any initial activation vector, always evolves to a limit cycle,

which for this reason we also refer to as attractor. In other words, a network

2

associates a limit cycle to any initial neural activation state that is given as an

input. For this reason, limit cycles can be considered as behaviors stored as

responses to initial stimuli. In the case of length 1 cycles, limit behaviors are

a single activation state which in the case of Hopﬁeld networks correspond to

the recollection of a memory. In the case of cycles with a length greater than 1,

stored limit behaviors are sequences of activation patterns which may correspond

to a stored dynamical sequence, such as the performance of a complex motor

task, or a dynamic sequence of static memories. In principle, a recurrent neural

network stores a certain number of limit behaviors as vectors from a 2N set in

a data structure deﬁned by N 2 parameters. Furthermore, these vectors can be

recovered in responses to input stimuli. This clearly has intriguing analogies

with content-addressable memory systems capable of indexing large strings of

bits (Hopﬁeld, 1987; Carpenter, 1989).

In the past, recurrent neural network, and speciﬁcally Hopﬁeld neural net-

works have been used to model memory storage and recall, though more recently

neurobiology models implemented recurrent neural networks to describe brain

activity in diﬀerent cognitive tasks. Mante et al. (2013) use recurrent neural

networks to model the integration of context information in the prefrontal cortex

in discrimination tasks. Similarly, Carnevale et al. (2015) model with recursive

neural networks the premotor cortex modulation of its response criteria in a de-

tection task with temporal uncertainty. Furthermore recurrent neural networks

are used to model phoneme acquisition (Kanda et al., 2009), and language ac-

quisition (Heinrich & Wermter, 2018). Neuroscience proposes two fundamental

conceptual frameworks that enable recurrent neural networks to store limit be-

haviors: the connectionist hypotheses and the innate hypotheses. Hebb (1949)

proposed the connectionist hypothesis, which assumes that a neural network

starts blank and forms new links or adjusts the existing ones each time it stores

a new limit behaviors. In this framework limit behaviors are stable equilibria

in the neural network dynamics. A criticism of Hebbs’ networks is that as new

limit behaviors are added the corresponding generated stable states start inter-

fering with the stable states associated with older limit behaviors. This limits

3

the maximum storage capacity C, which is deﬁned as the maximum number

of limit behaviors that can be stored. Notice that this deﬁnition is diﬀerent

from the usual deﬁnition used in associative memory networks, in which the

storage capacity is deﬁned as the number of uniformly distributed random vec-

tors that can be stored in an associative memory (Hassoun, 1993; Hassoun &

Watta, 1997). Amit et al. (1985a) shows that a Hebbian network has a storage

capacity of C = pN with p ≈0.14. In contrast, innate network models assume

that limit behaviors are stored using innate neural assemblies with a given con-

nectivity. Among other innate memory models, Perin et al. (2011) proposes

that groups of pyramidal neurons in the rats’ neocortex may be innate neuron

assemblies that may only partially change their overall connectivity structure.

Indeed, Perin et al. (2011) ﬁnds that these assemblies have similar connectivity

proprieties among diﬀerent animals, and argues that these assemblies serve as

building blocks for the formation of composite complex memories.

Whether we assume a connectionist or an innate network scheme as our

working framework, we implicitly assume that a recurrent neural network acts

as a content-addressing memory which given an input pattern (stimulus) re-

turns a limit behavior. This limit behavior can be a recovered memory or a

more complex neural sequence of neural activations that may be integrated into

a second neural network. To understand how well a recurrent neural network

acts as a content-addressing memory, the memory storage and retrieval litera-

ture uses discrete-time recurrent neural networks with McCulloch-Pitts neurons

(McCulloch & Pitts, 1943). Each discrete-time recurrent neural network, which

in this literature is sometimes referred to as Hopﬁeld neural network, is charac-

terized by its connectivity matrix J, which schematically represents the set of

synapses and electrical junctions connecting couples of neurons. Deterministic

discrete-time synchronous recursive neural networks are deterministic discrete

dynamical systems. This implies three properties. First, each state in the neu-

ral network uniquely transits to another one. Second, the reverse is not true,

diﬀerent states can evolve to the same state. Third, each state belongs to a

path that connects it to a stable activity pattern, i.e. a limit cycle. Given any

4

initial neural state, or input, a discrete-time recurrent neural network dynam-

ically falls into an attractor. In this framework, the attractor is the retrieved

limit behavior (Hebb, 1949; Amit et al., 1985b; McEliece et al., 1987; Folli et al.,

2017; Gutfreund et al., 1988; Bastolla & Parisi, 1998; Sompolinsky et al., 1988;

Wainrib & Touboul, 2013). Finally, it is important to consider that a recurrent

network associates a limit behavior to each input from the set of all possible

N-bit inputs, since the number of limit behaviors C is such that C << 2N, it

performs a many-to-few mapping. Recurrent neural network, and in particular

the Hopﬁeld model (Hopﬁeld, 1987), show how information can be stored via

attractor states. Indeed, there is some experimental support for discrete attrac-

tors in the rodents hippocampus cells’ activity (Pfeiﬀer & Foster, 2015), and

in monkey cells’ activity during tasks (Fuster & Alexander, 1971; Miyashita,

1988).

To understand how well and how many limit behaviors a fully developed neu-

ral network can store, we explore how the structure properties of an arbitrary

connectivity matrix J inﬂuences the attractor states of the network without im-

posing an a priori learning rules. Given a connectivity matrix J, to characterize

the network structure, we deﬁne the network’s asymmetry degree ϵ, and dilution

degree ρ. The most understood properties on ﬁxed discrete-time recurrent neu-

ral networks regard fully-connected Hopﬁeld neural networks. Fully-connected

recurrent Hopﬁeld neural networks are networks with dilution degree ρ = 0, in

which any couple of neurons is connected by two axons one in each direction. In

contrast, we deﬁne diluted recurrent Hopﬁeld neural networks as networks with

ρ > 0, in which only a subset of all neurons couples are connected. The existing

recurrent Hopﬁeld neural network literature mostly discusses symmetric neural

networks in which the weights of the two axons connecting neurons i and j

in both directions are the same, and in only few cases researchers investigate

asymmetric neural networks ϵ > 0, in which the weights are no longer equal.

Furthermore, most of the recurrent Hopﬁeld neural network literature which

studies the eﬀect of asymmetry assumes binary neurons with activations state

that can take values −1 and +1. Under these constraints, it is reported that

5

symmetric fully-connected networks, ϵ = 0, have several attractors, all of which

are formed by cycles of length 1 and 2. As the network becomes less symmetric,

ϵ > 0, the attractors are composed of longer neural activation patterns. Increas-

ing asymmetry in a fully connected neural network introduces severe drawbacks.

Indeed, when the degree of asymmetry is increased above a certain threshold a

neural network is subject to a transition from an ordered phase to a “chaotic”

regime (Bastolla & Parisi, 1998; Gutfreund et al., 1988). In the chaotic regime,

almost identical initial patterns can reach diﬀerent attractors, and the network

is characterized by a high sensitivity to initial conditions. Moreover, this chaotic

regime causes exponentially longer recognition time, where the recognition time

is the average number of discrete transitions required to reach the corresponding

attractor from a generic point in its basin of attraction. Toyoizumi & Huang

(2015) analyzes asymetric matrices ϵ = 0 with neuron activation proﬁle {−1, 1},

and shows that under these conditions as the limit cycle lenght scales exponen-

tialy with N, the number of attractor scales linearly with N. It is important

to point out that Bastolla & Parisi (1998), Toyoizumi & Huang (2015), and

Gutfreund et al. (1988) discuss synchronous discrete-time recurrent neural net-

works with single neuron activation proﬁle {−1, 1}. In this work, we show that

these results carry over to neurons with activation proﬁle {0, 1}. Neurons with

activations states {0, 1} represent a more accurate model of the single neuron

behavior that is observed as either ﬁring or at rest, and how these states de-

termine the excitatory or inhibitory interactions among the neurons in a live

neural network. From these evidence, we would argue that symmetric networks,

ϵ = 0, are the optimal limiting state for a developing neural network. Never-

theless, most natural neural networks are asymmetric, ϵ > 0 Perin et al. (2011).

Therefore, a puzzling contradiction emerges between the observed asymmetry

in natural synaptic connections, and the disastrous properties that emerge in

fully connected neural network models when the connectivity matrix becomes

more asymmetric. Furthermore, in almost all cases live neural networks are not

fully connected, ρ = 0, but tend to be highly diluted ρ ∼0.9, which implies

that not all but just a fraction of neuron couples are connected in the matrix

6

J. For this reason, this paper analyzes not only how the storage properties of

neural networks change as we change the asymmetry degree of fully connected

connectivity matrices J, ϵ ∈[0, 1] and ρ = 0. It also studies how the storage

properties change as asymmetric connectivity matrices J are diluted, ϵ = 1 and

ρ ∈[0, 1].

Because under certain connectivity conditions we get recurrent neural net-

works characterized by a minority of attractors with huge attraction basins and

a majority of attractors with small attraction basins, almost the entire state

space of the neural network is absorbed by few attractors. Consequently, we

decided to map the corresponding attractor pattern for each initial network

condition. This allows us to explore the entire landscape generated by the com-

plete mapping of all the attractors’ basins for diﬀerent connectivity matrices J

without losing the attractors with small basins. In addition, we deﬁne a way

to sample from the space of all connectivity matrices a subset of connectivity

matrices J with a given asymmetry degree ϵ, and sparsity degree ρ. Thus, we

can chart how the attractor landscape properties change sampling connectivity

matrices J for diﬀerent values of asymmetry degree ϵ, and sparsity degree ρ.

Unfortunately, the computation of the complete transition landscape over all

the 2N initial states is computationally feasible for neural networks up to a cer-

tain N. Nevertheless, given these limitations we ﬁnd the non-trivial result that

the symmetric/fully connected region is not the only region with optimal stor-

age capacity, but a second optimal region, the fully-asymmetric/high-dilution

region, exists as well. The scaling trends observed in simulations lead us to

hypothesize that the results are valid also for values of N larger than the nu-

merical computations we were able to perform. It is surprising to notice that

both regions exhibit a similar scaling of the storage capacity even if they have

very diﬀerent connectivity.

Additionally, the values of sparsity and asymmetry, which optimize the num-

ber of limit behaviors in discrete-time recurrent neural networks, are found to

be remarkably similar to those found in several regions of the mammalian brain

that share crucial roles in memory processes. Indeed, the neocortex and the

7

CA3 region of the hippocampus have been proposed as regions responsible for

memory storage (Rolls, 2012), and are clearly diluted (Witter, 2010). The prob-

ability of connection between two neocortical pyramidal cells is in the order of

10%, and the probability of connection between two hippocampal CA3 neurons

is nearly 4%. While the symmetric/fully optimal connected networks are con-

sistent with the observed live neural networks, the same networks contradict

a standard interpretation of Hebbs’ Learning, which are noted to tend to the

asymmetric/dilute optimal networks. Thus, we are left with the question of

why biological networks are found in the fully-asymmetric/high-dilution region.

There may be several possible explanations that beg for further investigation.

One possibility is that fully connected networks are more costly to develop and

maintain in comparison with diluted networks, especially for larger values of

N, because for large N there could be important constraints that limit the

development of all possible couples of neurons.

The role of dilution in natural neural networks was ignored in past research

with the exception of only a couple cases. Theoretical mean ﬁeld approaches on

diluted recurrent neural networks showed weakly correlated ﬁring patterns sim-

ilar to the patterns observed in the brain cortex (van Vreeswijk & Sompolinsky,

1998; Monteforte & Wolf, 2012). Kim et al. (2017) used simulation to show how,

in contrast to fully connected recurrent networks, scale-free networks have an in-

creased number of ﬁnal behaviors with the side eﬀect of increased errors. Brunel

(2016) is an other work that comes to the conclusion that diluted network have

optimal storage capacity. This later work investigates the connectivity struc-

ture of recurrent neural networks with excitatory synaptic connectivity which

are close to their storage limit given a certain degree of retrieval robustness in-

dependently from the learning rule. To this aim Brunel (2016) assume that the

inhibitory interactions are fully-connected and ﬁnds the excitatory matrices that

store the greatest number of attractors both analytically with the cavity method

and numerically with perceptron learning. Then it investigates the statistical

properties of these optimal matrices in large networks. Brunel found that, the

optimal excitatory connectivity matrix is diluted, it has several zero-weight

8

synapses, and that the number of neuron couples with reciprocal connections

are greater than in a random network, and that their weight is larger than the

average connection weight. Similarly, the approach of this paper is independent

of the learning rule, and it searches for the properties of the networks that have

optimal storage capacity. Nevertheless, instead of calculating a neural network

that can store the maximum number of attractors, it assumes that a network

which has reached its storing capacity limit has certain characteristic optimal

structures. Thus to ﬁnd this optimal connectivity structures we can sample

sets of connectivity matrices J with given values of asymmetry ϵ and dilution

ρ. Each of these sets will have a characteristic asymmetry degree ϵ and dilu-

tion degree ρ and be composed of connectivity matrices J with certain memory

storage properties. From these sets, we can ﬁnd the values of asymmetry and

dilution which characterize the connectivity matrices J with optimal memory

storage properties. Discrete-time recurrent neural networks are minimal models

designed to capture the fundamental nature of neural networks, and more real-

istic models have been proposed (Gerstner, 1998; Maass, 1999; Koch & Segev,

1998; Galves & L¨ocherbach, 2013). Unfortunately, these models have a neces-

sary additional computational cost which would not allow for such extensive

exploration of the attractor landscape associated to connectivity matrices J at

diﬀerent degrees of dilution and asymmetry.

2. Discrete-Time Recurrent Neural Networks

We consider a network of N binary neurons interacting via a connectivity

matrix J, with matrix elements Jij for i, j = 1, ..., N. The matrix element Jij

represents the strength of the connection between the pre-synaptic neuron j and

the post-synaptic neuron i. The state of each neuron is represented by a binary

state variable σi ∈{0, 1}, where i = 1, . . . , N. A neuron σi takes values either

0 or 1 if it is respectively at rest (inactive) or ﬁring (active).

9

2.1. Dynamics

In this section, we introduce a synchronous discrete-time recurrent neural

network model with McCulloch-Pitts (McCulloch & Pitts, 1943) neurons. At

each time step, all neurons are updated synchronously according to the discrete-

time recurrent neural network evolution rule:

σi(t + 1) = θ
N
X

j=1
Jijσj(t) −ηi

,
(1)

where θ(x) is the Heaviside step function (θ(x) = 1 for x ≥0, and θ(x) = 0

otherwise). At the next step t + 1, the neuron i ﬁres, σi(t + 1) = 1, if the

summation of its synaptic inputs is above a threshold ηi, otherwise the neuron

is inactive, σi(t + 1) = 0. In the results discussed in this paper we set ηi = 0 for

all neurons. The vector σ(t) = (σ1(t), σ2(t), . . . , σN(t)) represents the activation

proﬁle of all neurons at time t. This activation function emulates the all-or-none

principle in neuronal activation potentials. The input summation is performed

without any scaling on N since the threshold is equal to zero. The scaling factor

does not inﬂuence the network output that is indeed determined only by the

sign of the linear summation. In principle neurons update asynchronously, but

Gutfreund et al. (1988), and N¨utzel (1991) observed that synchronous updating

neurons are qualitatively equivalent to asynchronous updating neurons when

considering long time scales. Because the objective is to map the full attractor

landscape, we have to explore all the possible initial conditions. For this reason,

it is fundamental to consider a simpliﬁed scheme, and we chose to use a parallel

synchronous evolution rule to simplify and speed-up the numerical simulations.

2.2. Content-Addressing Memory Model

A synchronous discrete-time recurrent neural network is a deterministic dy-

namical system deﬁned on a ﬁnite state space. Given any initial neural acti-

vation proﬁle σ(0) the discrete-time recurrent neural network deterministically

evolves in time until it converges to an attractor, which can be composed of

a limit cycle composed of a certain number of neural activation states. When

10

a query is submitted to a content-addressing memory we input a search entry

and the device returns an address to matching stored data. A discrete-time

recurrent neural network works analogously to a content-addressing memory. If

the initial neural activation proﬁle σ(0) is set equal to an external stimulus, or

search entry in the content-addressing memory analogy, then the neural network

dynamically converges to an attractor, which represents the retrieved responce.

Given this analogy, the limit behavior storage capacity C of a discrete-time

recurrent neural network is the number of attractors that are stored in the

network.

According to Hebb’s rule, memories are added to a Hopﬁeld network by

adding to the neural connectivity matrix J dyadics of the form σT σ (Hebb,

1949). These dyadics generate attractors formed by a length 1 cycle. Thus,

in Hebbian learning a memory is a limit behavior composed of a single neural

activation proﬁle σ. Amit et al. (1985a) demonstrated that there is an upper

limit to the storage capacity of Hebbian learning networks, and this limit is set

to pN with p ≈0.14. This storage capacity upper limit emerges because each

time we add a new dyadic term a new attractor is introduced in the Hopﬁeld

network dynamics, and at a certain point the new dyadic terms associated with

the latest observed attractor interferes with the basin of the old attractors.

In this paper, we use an approach that is independent from the speciﬁc

learning rule.
We assume that, independently from the learning rule, when

a discrete-time recurrent neural network stores a number of limit behaviors

close to its storing capacity then it approaches characteristic optimal connec-

tivity structures. Thus, instead of packing as many memories as we can in a

discrete-time recurrent neural network, and then studying the emergent net-

work structure. We use the total number of attractors to count the number of

the network’s limit behavior storage capacity. Clearly, some of these attractors

may be spurious associations that were not explicitly learned. Consequently, we

search for connectivity structures that form the recurrent neural network with

the maximum number of attractors. More precisely, we study how many attrac-

tors are present in a given arbitrary neural network with a certain connectivity

11

matrix J characterized by a speciﬁc degree of asymmetry and dilution. Finally,

we can study how a recurrent neural network with an optimal connectivity ma-

trix reduces the complexity of the N-dimensional initial problem by clustering

the input data in a certain number C of attraction basins.

2.3. Synaptic Matrix

J is the neural network’s connectivity matrix with matrix elements Jij. To

analyze the relation between the full attractor landscape and certain global

properties of J, we deﬁned a way to generate a random connectivity matrix J

given two fundamental network parameters, respectively the asymmetry cou-

pling degree ϵ, and the sparsity parameter ρ. This section ﬁrst describes how to

generate a random connectivity matrix J with an arbitrary asymmetry degree ϵ,

and ﬁxed sparsity parameter ρ = 1, then it describes how to generate a random

connectivity matrix J with arbitrary values of ϵ and ρ.

The elements of a random connectivity matrix Jij with an arbitrary asym-

metry degree ϵ and ﬁxed sparsity parameter ρ = 1 are generated as the con-

vex sum of the matrix-elements from a symmetric random matrix Sij, and the

matrix-elements from a antisymmetric random matrix Aij:


Sij + ϵ

Jij =

1 −ϵ

2Aij.
(2)

2

Sij and Aij are generated with a three-step process. First, the lower diagonal

elements of Sij and Aij are randomly drawn from a uniform distribution with

greater-than-zero probability in the closed interval [−1, +1]. P0(x) = 1

2θ(1−x2)

is the distribution from which both the lower diagonal elements of Sij and Aij

are drawn, P0(Sij) and P0(Aij). Second, the upper diagonal elements are set:

Sji=Sij and Aji=−Aij. Lastly, the diagonal elements are set to zero: Sii = 0

and Aii = 0. Jij = 0 corresponds to no-connection between i and j, and an Jij

element greater or smaller than zero corresponds respectively to an excitatory

or an inhibitory connection. For ϵ=0, neurons interact symmetrically with each

other; at ϵ=1, Jij is fully-asymmetric. For ϵ ranging from 1 to 2, the strength

of antisymmetric couplings increases. In this work, we restrict the analysis for

12

ϵ ∈[0, 1]. We set the diagonal elements to zero, Jii=0 which implies no autapses

(the term autapse indicates a synapse connecting a neuron onto itself).

In order to generate a random connectivity matrix Jij with an arbitrary

asymmetry degree ϵ and arbitrary sparsity parameter ρ, we ﬁrst generate Sij

and Aij, and then use Eq. 2 to form Jij. To generate Sij and Aij we draw the

elements of the respective lower diagonal elements according to the distribution

P(x) = (1 −ρ)P0(x) + ρδ(x),
(3)

where x takes the place of Sij and Aij, and δ(x) is the Dirac function. P(x)

ensures that the rate of zero-valued elements is determined by the sparsity

parameter ρ. Indeed, a random matrix according to this distribution can be

generated by drawing Sij and Aij elements from P0(x), and then setting each

element with probability ρ to zero. In (2), the left term determines the ratio and

distribution of non-null elements, and the right term determines the ratio of null

elements. Then, the upper diagonal elements are set to Sji=Sij and Aji=−Aij,

and the diagonal elements are set to zero. Finally, we construct Jij accordingly

to (2). This procedure preserves the symmetry and the role of ϵ. Indeed, while

ϵ = 0 represents a symmetric matrix with a fraction of zeros on average equal

to ρ + 1/N, ϵ = 1 indicates a generic, asymmetric, matrix with a number of

zeros on average equal to ρ2 + 1/N, which on average is approximately equal to

2ρ −1 + 1/N for ρ close to one. ρ determines how many elements of the matrix

are null, and thus the dilution of the neural network connectivity. For ρ = 0

we have a fully-connected neural network, in which any two neurons share a

synaptic connection in both directions. In the limit for ρ that gets closer to 1,

we get a neural network with constantly fewer neural connections, and for ρ = 1

we have a network completely lacking any synapses.

2.4. Neural Network Dynamics

Generated a connectivity matrix for a given pair (ϵ, ρ), we evolve all 2N initial

conditions. Being the conﬁguration space ﬁnite and the dynamics deterministic,

each state σ(t) uniquely transits to a state σ(t+1). Necessarily, after a transient

13

time, the system relaxes on a limit cycle. Given a certain J, let G = (σ, T) be a

directed graph with nodes given by the neurons proﬁles σ, and edges T deﬁned

as directed couples such that (σ, σ′) ∈T if σ transits to σ′. All nodes in G have

one and only one outgoing edge. Let U be the undirected graph associated to

the directed graph G, such that for each (a, b) ∈G there is an undirected couple

{a, b} ∈U. Furthermore, let a weakly connected component of a graph G be a

maximal set of nodes W such that for each couple of nodes (a, b) ∈W there is

a path that follows the edges in U and connects a to be b. Since in discrete-

time recursive neural networks each initial neuron proﬁle of all the possible 2N

patterns arrives at the corresponding attractor, G is partitioned in a ﬁnite set

of C weakly connected components each leading to an attractor (Diestel, 2010).

An example of this decomposition is reported in Fig. (1) for a simple N=6

case. This speciﬁc network maps 64 possible states into four attractors: two

limit cycles with respectively L = 3, 4 and two ﬁxed points.

For each weakly connected component k, where k = 1 . . . C, and C is the

number of attractors, we measure the following observable variables: (i) the

cycle length Lk is the number of states in its attractor, if k is a ﬁxed point Lk = 1

or if it is a limit cycles Lk > 1; (ii) the basin of attraction size Sk corresponds to

the number of states in the k-th weakly connected component; (iii) the average

distance Dk between a generic state in the k-th weakly connected component

and the corresponding attractor (see table 1).

Table 1: Measured quantities.

Quantity
Description

C
Number of attractors per matrix

Lk
Attractor length

Sk
Basin of attraction size

Dk
Average distance from the attractor

We generate R replicas of the connectivity matrix J with given ϵ and ρ (up

to 100000), and average the values of C, Lk, Sk, and Dk. Then we produce the

14

Limit Cycle State
Starting State
Transient State

9
11
17
21

1

23

4

5

24

26
19

12

13

61

25

8
15

27
29
31
57

28
18

40
16

0

63

30

45
49

3

59

43

32

38
39
42

50

33
35
37
41

58

44

51

6
7
10

53
55
56

46

14

34

47

20
22

36

N=6, 64 states
C=4
L={ 1, 1, 3, 4 }
S={ 1, 19, 24, 20 }

2

60

48
62

52

54

Figure 1: (Color online) Example of weakly connected components of the transition graph G

derived from a given connectivity matrix J. The 2N numbered circles represents the neural

activation proﬁles σ. In the present case, N=6, and the connectivity matrix J is such that

ϵ=0 and ρ=0. There are four weakly connected components (C = 4), each one containing

one attractor, two of them are ﬁxed points, L1 = L2 = 1, the other are cycles with length

L3 =3 and L4 =4. The size of their attraction basins are S1 = 1, S2 = 19, S3 = 24, and

S4 = 20 respectively. Green circles indicate the points belonging to attractors, while blue and

red circles indicate respectively transient and starting points.

histograms N(C|ϵ, ρ), N(Lk|ϵ, ρ), N(Sk|ϵ, ρ), N(Dk|ϵ, ρ).

15

2.5. Large N Limit

All the quantities in table 1 depend on the network size N. Given a network

sizes N, we compute the values of these quantities from the complete transition

graph G with all the 2N neural activation proﬁles. Thus we measure the scaling

of these quantities for diﬀerent values of N. Because a statistical analysis would

be biased by the broad distribution of the basins sizes, we study the complete

graph G.
Indeed, a few basins are large with size 2N−m where m≪N, and

several basins are very small in size. Thus, a statistical analysis would highlight

only the trajectories absorbed by the largest basins, given that the probability

of selecting the smaller basins is very small.
This would result in a under

estimation of the number of independent limit cycles.
For this reason, it is

mandatory to evolve all initial conditions to map the whole landscape of the

equilibrium properties of the network. We can complete the analysis only up to

a computationally feasible value of N, which turns out to be N ≈22. We have

this computational bound because the number of initial conditions scales like

2N, and the time to evolve all these states and to ﬁnd the associated attractors

scales proportionally to 22N.

In the numerical results presented in the next section we show that the scal-

ing proprieties of N are mostly preserved across the explored range. Moreover,

the functional form and the eventual exponents or multiplicative factors depend

on the network parameters (ϵ, ρ). A reasonable question is whether or not the

scaling exponents derived from these limited N values can be assumed to be

valid in the thermodynamic limit, for large N. To ensure that there are no

major changes as N diverges, we have performed a preliminary investigation of

the number of cycles of length 1, N1 for ρ=0 and ϵ in the range [0,1]. Tanaka &

Edwards (1980) presents a theoretical prediction for this quantity, N1=eγ(ϵ)N,

with known γ(ϵ) in the inﬁnite size N limit. To test, if the scaling exponent

numerically obtained from our simulations with N < 18 matches the theoretical

inﬁnite size exponent, we compared the estimated γ(ϵ) value, ˆγ(ϵ), from our

simulations, with the theoretical γ(ϵ) found in Tanaka & Edwards (1980). We

found that the two exponents agree within one part per thousand. This result,

16

though not conclusive, gives us conﬁdence that the ﬁnite size estimates of the

scaling exponents can be plausible approximations in the large N limit, both in

the dense and diluted cases.

Summarizing, this paper focuses on limited size neural networks, this gives us

the possibility to exhaustively explore the whole equilibrium landscape and map

its changes as symmetry and dilution are varied. A vast amount of literature

has been concerned with the analysis of the statistical properties of large neural

networks in the thermodynamic limit, using mainly mean-ﬁeld theories, but

little is known about diluted networks. The future objective is to apply the

cavity method (Mezard et al., 1987), or the replica method (Gardner, 1988), to

analytically determine the number of attractors for diluted connectivity matrices

with large N. Thus, we will be able to compare these analytical results with

the computational results presented here.

3. Results

In this section, we numerically investigate the attractors’ landscape of a

discrete-time recurrent neural network for diﬀerent values of the network size

N, the asymmetry degree (ϵ) and the synaptic connectivity dilution (ρ). We

report numerical results obtained averaging over R ∼104 replica matrices. We

start characterizing fully-connected matrices with a speciﬁc degree of asymmetry

(ρ = 0, ϵ). This class of matrices was already investigated analytically, and

numerically sampling over the initial conditions, and assuming neuron activation

state −1 and 1. Unfortunately, as mentioned earlier sampling on the initial

conditions may lead to biased results that miss smaller attractors. Furthermore,

we use the more realistic model with neuron activation state 0 and 1. Next, we

characterize statistically high-dilution/asymmetric cases, a region that so far

has been unexplored.

3.1. Fully Connected Network: from Symmetric to Asymmetric Networks

In ﬁgure 2, we report all the quantities listed in table 1 measured for varying

ϵ with ρ = 0, and the corresponding scaling laws. Here, and in the following,

17

⟨X⟩indicates an average on X taken over all the attractors, k, and all R repli-

cas of the connectivity matrix J, where X is a quantity from Table 1. As it

is shown in (a), increasing asymmetry slows down the time required to con-

vergence on the attractor. Thus, as asymmetry increases the stimulus-response

time increases. Plot (b) shows how ⟨D⟩scales with N and that its trend is

well reproduced by a polynomial law. For the mean length of the limit cycles

⟨L⟩, we observe two distinct regimes, as clearly presented in panel (c) where ⟨L⟩

shows a transition around ϵ = 0.75. This transition for discrete-time recurrent

neural networks with neuron activation states σi ∈{0, +1} is analogous to the

transition observed in recurrent neural networks with σi ∈{−1, +1} (Gutfre-

und et al., 1988). Correspondingly, the scaling law (d) displays a rather sharp

transition from an ordered phase where

⟨L⟩∼N γp
(4)

to a chaotic regime, in which the mean length of limit cycles increases exponen-

tially with the system size N:

⟨L⟩∼2γeN.
(5)

An exponentially long limit cycle length means that for large N, the network

displays longer attractors with seemingly aperiodic behavior (the network dy-

namics appears to be chaotic).

In panels e and g, we report the mean values of the number of attractors

per matrix, ⟨C⟩, and of the basins of attraction size ⟨S⟩for fully-connected ma-

trices, ρ = 0. It is clearly evident how the network loses the capacity to cluster

the input data in sub-domains as ϵ is increased: the number of attractors ⟨C⟩is

drastically reduced and correspondingly the dimension of the basins increases.

The state space tends to be subdivided into a small number of large regions,

each with its attractor, and the network is no longer able to distinguish diﬀerent

inputs. The average number of attractors scales exponentially for ϵ = 0 (panel

f). For fully-connected matrices, ρ = 0, and ϵ = 0, ⟨C⟩∼2γeN with γe = 0.28.

For ρ = 0, and ϵ = 1, the number of attractors scales polynomially, as expected

18

Figure 2: The panels on the left column report the averaged quantities in Table 1 as a function

of the asymmetry degree ϵ for N = 8, 11, 14, 18. The panels on the right column display the

corresponding scaling laws with the system size N for ϵ = 0, 0.3, 0.7, 1. (a) Increasing the

asymmetry slows down the convergence time ⟨D⟩to the attractor, the corresponding scaling

law (b) is polynomial with N. (c) The asymmetry produces the emergence of limit cycles

with length L > 2, at ϵ ∼0.75 the averaged ⟨L⟩increases exponentially ∼2γN with exponent

γ = 0.1 (d), which indicates exponentially long limit cycles. (e-f) Increasing asymmetry in

fully connected neural networks leads to a drastic reduction of the number of attractors which

develop larger basins (g-h). This implies a loss of computational ability, because for larger ϵ

the network becomes unable to cluster the input data in sub-domains.

from Toyoizumi & Huang (2015) analysis. In ⟨C⟩, there is probably a transi-

tion as for the attractor length ⟨L⟩. Panel (h) shows the scaling of ⟨S⟩. For

fully-connected matrices, ρ = 0, ⟨S⟩has an inverse behavior compared to ⟨C⟩,

⟨S⟩scales exponentially for ϵ = 1, and it scales polynomially for ϵ = 0. Increas-

ing asymmetry causes the network to develop a glassy behavior, the network is

greatly slowed down and unable to quickly recognize the attractor of a given

input. The higher the asymmetry degree, the higher the probability that the

19

system admits only one attractor with a basin 2N states large, the network loses

its capacity to deal with “complexity”. In conclusion, although asymmetry in

synaptic connection is a property of biological networks, asymmetry in dense

networks is not suﬃcient to realize a network capable of storing and retriev-

ing stimulus response associations. We now investigate the interplay between

asymmetry and sparsity and how the dilution helps asymmetric networks to

store more memories.

3.2. From Fully-Connected to Diluted Asymmetric Networks

A diluted and asymmetric discrete-time recurrent neural network recovers

an optimal storage capacity and stimulus-response association time compared

to a dense asymmetric recurrent neural network.
Greater dilution increases

the number attractors and accelerates the retrieval process. Here, we analyze

the same quantities measured in the previous section, but we consider diﬀerent

dilution values ρ ∈(0, 1), and keep constant the asymmetry coeﬃcient ϵ=1.

Thus, we consider asymmetric networks at diﬀerent dilution levels. In ﬁgure 3,

we report how the convergence time D changes with the dilution ρ (a) and how

it scales with N (b). Increasing dilution ρ drastically decreases the average

stimulus-response association ⟨D⟩for pattern retrieval.
In other words, the

dilution improves the ability of the network to converge to an attractor. Figure 3

(c) shows how as dilution increases the length of limit cycles is reduced. In highly

diluted systems (ρ above 0.7), a polynomial ﬁt better predicts the observed data

compared to an exponential ﬁt (d). The scaling coeﬃcient is γp=0.66±0.07 for

ρ=0.95. In other words, for diluted networks the limit cycles length does not

scale exponentially with N anymore, and the “chaotic” regime ceases.

Figure 4 reports the main result of the present work.
It provides direct

evidence of the nontrivial eﬀect of dilution: increasing dilution in an asymmet-

ric network causes the appearance of an unexpected maximum for the storage

capacity ⟨C⟩at ρ=0.95 (a). This value approximately corresponds to 90% of

zeros in the synaptic matrix, meaning only 10% of the neuron pairs are con-

nected. The height of the peak exponentially scales with the network size N (b)

20

Figure 3: The panels on the left, (a) and (c), show respectively how the average convergence

time ⟨D⟩and the average limit cycle length ⟨L⟩change over diﬀerent ρ values given N =

13, 14, 16, 18. The panels on the right, (b) and (d), show how ⟨D⟩and ⟨L⟩scale over diﬀerent

N values given ρ = 0, 0.4, 0.8, 0.95. Increasing sparsity in asymmetric matrices reduces

the convergence time and the attractor lengths. Thus, sparse matrices recover

computation ability and lose exponentially long limit cycles characteristic of the

chaotic regime.

with γe=0.28±0.02 for ρ=0.95, which is approximately the same scaling value

estimated for ⟨C⟩in fully-connected symmetric networks with ϵ=0, ρ=0.

A caveat is due because ﬁnite size eﬀects may determine the emergence of

the peak. Indeed, it is unclear, given the current observations, if, for large N,

the peak position around ρ=0.95 is stable or if it drifts towards ρ=1 (ﬁnite size

eﬀect). For this purpose, possible future investigation could be the analytical

estimation of the peak position given the thermodynamic limit, which may

21

Figure 4: (a) The plot shows how ⟨C⟩changes with the dilution coeﬃcient ρ for diﬀerent val-

ues of N, N = 13, 14, 16, 18. (b) The plot shows how ⟨C⟩scales with N for ρ = 0, 0.4, 0.8, 0.95.

The inset shows the exponential coeﬃcients for diﬀerent values of ρ. The ﬁgure reports

the main result of the present work.
As sparsity in fully asymmetric matrix

is increased, an optimal region appears: the non-monotonic peak in which the

network architecture admits an exponentially large number of attractors.
Fur-

thermore, as shown in Fig. 3, in the same regime, the network is able to quickly

recall memories converging to the corresponding attractor, and the attractor is

generally a limit cycle with small L. All these features show an optimal asymmet-

ric/diluted network regime that maximizes the storage capacity and the recovery

eﬃciency.

be obtained with the replica method or the more appropriate cavity method

Mezard et al. (1987). It is important to point out that if it is actually true that

the peak drifts and disappears in the thermodynamic limit, this implies that

its maximum position gets closer and closer to the “empty” matrix value ρ=1.

Given that the peak height will most likely increase exponentially with N, we

would ﬁnd that an exponential number of stimulus-response associations could

be stored in almost-connection-free large networks.

To qualitatively validate the persistence of the peak for large networks, we

implemented a Monte Carlo experiment that estimates the average number of

22

attractors ⟨C⟩for networks with N = 45, ϵ = 1 and for 0 ≤ρ ≤1.
For

each network, we sampled 28 initial conditions out of 245, thus we explore a

fraction equal to 10−11 of the entire initial condition space. This estimate is

biased diﬀerently depending on the network’s speciﬁc values of symmetry ϵ and

dilution ρ, because for certain values of symmetry ϵ and dilution ρ we have

a diﬀerent distribution of the size of the attraction basins, which produces a

disproportion in the sampling probability of attractors with small attraction

basins.
For N = 45, we ﬁnd that the peak at ρ = 0.95 is preserved, but

that the value of ⟨C⟩relatively raises for ρ << 0.8 compared to ρ >> 0.8,

because for ρ << 0.8, ⟨C⟩is overestimated with regards to the estimate at

ρ >> 0.8. This indicates the random sampling inapplicability and the need

for an exhaustive scan of the initial condition. Furthermore, this observation

reinforces the hypothesis that for large N the peak persists around ρ = 0.95.

Figure 5:
(a) The plot shows how the average basin size ⟨S⟩changes as a function of the

dilution parameter ρ for diﬀerent values of N, N = 13, 14, 16, 18. (b) Shows how ⟨S⟩scales

with N for ρ = 0, 0.4, 0.7, 0.95.
The insert shows the exponential scaling coeﬃcients for

diﬀerent ρ values.
This ﬁgure shows that the region with the maximum storage

capacity is characterized by many small attraction basins.

Figure 5 shows how the average basin size ⟨S⟩changes as a function of the

23

dilution and of the network size N.
In correspondence of the peak in ⟨C⟩,

the dimension of the attraction basins decreases (see ﬁgure 5 (a)). The state

space tends to be subdivided in a large number of small regions, each with

its attractor. This and the fast stimulus-response association tells us that the

network is able to quickly subdivide the inputs in clusters: in fact, at ρ=0.95, the

average convergence time is strongly reduced with respect to the chaotic regime

and its scaling turns from exponential to polynomial (see ﬁgure 3, (a)-(b)).

All these observations allow us to conclude that asymmetric-diluted recurrent

neural networks exhibit optimal information processing and memory storage for

ρ=0.95 and ϵ=1.

4. Discussion

This paper discusses how the dilution and asymmetry of a discrete-time

recurrent neural network connectivity matrix J inﬂuences the network’s limit

behavior storage capacity and its response time.
More precisely, it explores

the eﬀect of dilution in a discrete-time recurrent neural network of binary neu-

rons with an asymmetric excitatory/inhibitory connectivity matrix. Given an

arbitrary learning rule, and an incremental sequence of memories, a recurrent

neural network, reaches a limit behavior storage limit. We suppose that this

limit is in general characteristic of the particular learning rule. To go beyond

the limitation of having to assume a particular learning rule, we consider the

recurrent neural network limit behavior storage capacity as the upper bound of

the limit behavior storage capacity of any arbitrary learning rule. Furthermore,

we assume that the connectivity matrix of a recurrent neural network which

has stored a number of limit behaviors close to the storage limit must have a

connectivity matrix characterized by a speciﬁc structure with certain values of

asymmetry and dilution. Clearly, this characteristic connectivity structure must

approach the structure of a recurrent neural network with the largest number

of attractors obtained from a pool of all possible networks, because this should

be equivalent to the network that has potentially stored the largest number of

24

memory vectors. To ﬁnd this characteristic storing structure, we sample random

connectivity matrices J of arbitrary asymmetry ϵ and dilution ρ, and for each

matrix we map the full attractor basin for all 2N initial conditions. This allows

us to examine the neural network’s storage capacity, and measure how quickly it

clusters 2N initial conditions into the corresponding attractors. We considered

the scenario in which the network is potentially able to store memories both as

ﬁxed point attractors and limit cycles attractors, without imposing any a priori

learning role.

We found two regions in the asymmetric/diluted space (ϵ, ρ) of all possible

sampled networks in which neural networks exhibit optimal storage capacity.

The ﬁrst optimal storage capacity region contains asymmetric ϵ = 1 and diluted

ρ ∼0.95 connectivity matrices. This means that a large fraction (∼90%) of

elements in the connectivity matrix are zero. The second optimal region incor-

porates fully-symmetric ϵ = 0, and fully connected matrices ρ = 0, in this region

almost all connectivity matrix elements are non-null. Similar connectivity as in

the ﬁrst region is observed in the neocortex and in the CA3 region of the hip-

pocampus (Witter, 2010; Perin et al., 2011). These natural neural networks

are implicated in memory storage and retrial. These observations are coherent

with previous analytical and computational observations (Kim et al., 2017; van

Vreeswijk & Sompolinsky, 1998; Monteforte & Wolf, 2012), but it was unknown

how this optimal connectivity changes in the surrounding of the optimal value

of ρ and was considered as substantial evidence against Hebbian learning. For

this reason Hebbian learning is considered as a poor model of learning in ani-

mal neural networks. Contrarily, the second region is only predicted by Hebbian

learning but is not observed in natural neural networks. Furthermore, we found

that in the fully-connected ρ = 0 and fully-asymmetric region ϵ = 1, the re-

current neural networks exhibit a very low storage capacity, and large basins of

attraction, which implies that the network is no longer able to distinguish and

separate diﬀerent external stimuli. In addition, fully-connected and asymmetric

regions have very long (glassy) recognition times, which compromise the ability

of the recurrent neural network to respond to external stimuli. From a neurobi-

25

ological prospective, this means that when a recurrent neural network drifts out

of its optimal state for some external cause such as a disease, then the network

becomes less eﬀective in separating diﬀerent stimuli, and discriminating errors

from signals. In addition, its response times become longer. In line with these

observations, Tang et al. (2014) report that the brain of patients aﬀected by

autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) presents an altered connectivity, or dilution,

compared to healthy individuals, and speciﬁcally reports an alteration in the

neocortex connectivity. Suppose that the brain regions involved in ASDs are

displaced from their optimal asymmetric/diluted region, we could argue, given

our observations, that this displacement may cause a disruption of the ability

to separate diﬀerent stimuli in distinct responses, and produce longer response

times.

5. Conclusion

From our exploration of the role of connectivity and symmetry in recursive

neural networks, we ﬁnd two regions that optimize limit behavior storage and

signal-response association. The ﬁrst region is composed of asymmetric/diluted

networks, and the second region is formed of symmetric/fully-connected net-

works. Furthermore, we found a third region made of asymmetric/fully-connected

networks characterized by chaotic and glassy limit behaviors. From these re-

sults we are left with the question of why adaptation and evolution selected the

ﬁrst region. Is this because more non-zero elements in the connectivity matrix

corresponds to more costly connections? Is it because fully-connected networks

imply the existence of two axons between any two neurons and this would be

spatially impossible if not technically implausible for large network sizes N? Is

it because the natural learning rules that guide neural networks development

force them to dynamically evolve in the second region?

Lastly, to partly overcome the smallness of N, we have also analyzed the

scaling properties of the main measured quantities. We have found that the

scaling behavior for the averaged number of length 1 cycles in fully-connected

26

symmetric networks are perfectly in agreement with theoretical values found by

Tanaka & Edwards (1980). Thus the averaged number of length 1 cycles is not

biased by the ﬁnite size eﬀects. In addition, in the analyzed range for small N,

all the scaling laws appear highly robust. These observations do not guarantee

that the same occurs for the scaling laws of other observable quantities in diluted

networks. Nevertheless, it gives us conﬁdence in the extrapolation of the scaling

laws observed in this paper.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any

commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential

conﬂict of interest.

References

References

Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., & Sompolinsky, H. (1985a). Spin-glass models of

neural networks. Physical Review A, 32, 1007–1018.

Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., & Sompolinsky, H. (1985b). Storing inﬁnite numbers

of patterns in a spin-glass model of neural networks. In Spin Glass Theory

and Beyond: An Introduction to the Replica Method and Its Applications.

(pp. 428–431).

Bastolla, U., & Parisi, G. (1998). Relaxation, closing probabilities and transition

from oscillatory to chaotic attractors in asymmetric neural networks. Journal

of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 31, 4583–4602.

Brunel, N. (2016). Is cortical connectivity optimized for storing information?

Nature Neuroscience, 19, 749–755.

27

Carnevale, F., deLafuente, V., Romo, R., Barak, O., & Parga, N. (2015). Dy-

namic Control of Response Criterion in Premotor Cortex during Perceptual

Detection under Temporal Uncertainty. Neuron, 86, 1067–1077.

Carpenter, G. A. (1989). Neural network models for pattern recognition and

associative memory. Neural Networks, 2, 243–257.

Diestel, R. (2010). Graph Theory. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

Folli, V., Leonetti, M., & Ruocco, G. (2017). On the Maximum Storage Capacity

of the Hopﬁeld Model. Front. Comput. Neurosci, 10, 144.

Fuster, J. M., & Alexander, G. E. (1971). Neuron Activity Related to Short-

Term Memory. Science, 173, 652–654.

Galves, A., & L¨ocherbach, E. (2013). Inﬁnite Systems of Interacting Chains

with Memory of Variable Length-A Stochastic Model for Biological Neural

Nets. Journal of Statistical Physics, 151, 896–921.

Gardner, E. (1988). The space of interactions in neural network models. Journal

of Physics A: General Physics, 21, 257–270.

Gerstner, W. (1998). Populations of spiking neurons. Pulsed Neural Networks,

1, 261–295.

Gutfreund, H., Reger, J. D., & Young, A. P. (1988). The nature of attractors

in an asymmetric spin glass with deterministic dynamics. Journal of Physics

A: Mathematical and General, 21, 2775.

Hassoun, M. H. (1993). Associative neural memories : theory and implementa-

tion. Oxford University Press.

Hassoun, M. H., & Watta, P. B. (1997).
Associative memory networks.
In

E. Fiesler, & R. Beale (Eds.), Handbook of Neural Computation, chapter 14.

Taylor & Francis Group.

Hebb, D. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. New York: Wiley.

28

Heinrich, S., & Wermter, S. (2018). Interactive natural language acquisition in

a multi-modal recurrent neural architecture. Connection Science, 30, 99–133.

Hopﬁeld, J. J. (1987). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent

collective computational abilities.
In Spin Glass Theory and Beyond: An

Introduction to the Replica Method and Its Applications (pp. 411–415).

Kanda, H., Ogata, T., Takahashi, T., Komatani, K., & Okuno, H. G. (2009).

Phoneme acquisition model based on vowel imitation using Recurrent Neural

Network. In 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots

and Systems (pp. 5388–5393). IEEE.

Kim, D.-H., Park, J., & Kahng, B. (2017). Enhanced storage capacity with

errors in scale-free Hopﬁeld neural networks: An analytical study.
PLOS

ONE, 12, e0184683.

Koch, C., & Segev, I. (1998). Methods in Neuronal Modeling: From Ions to

Networks. Computational neuroscience, 2, 1–26.

Maass, W. (1999). Computing with Spiking Neurons. Pulsed Neural Networks,

(pp. 55–85).

Mante, V., Sussillo, D., Shenoy, K. V., & Newsome, W. T. (2013). Context-

dependent computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex. Nature,

503, 78–84.

McCulloch, W. S., & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent

in nervous activity. The Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5, 115–133.

McEliece, R. J., Posner, E. C., Rodemich, E. R., & Venkatesh, S. S. (1987).

The Capacity of the Hopﬁeld Associative Memory. IEEE Transactions on

Information Theory, 33, 461–482.

Mezard, M., Parisi, G., & Virasoro, M. A. (1987). Spin glass theory and beyond.

World Scientiﬁc.

29

Miyashita, Y. (1988). Neuronal correlate of visual associative long-term memory

in the primate temporal cortex. Nature, 335, 817–820.

Monteforte, M., & Wolf, F. (2012).
Dynamic ﬂux tubes form reservoirs of

stability in neuronal circuits. Physical Review X , 2, 041007.

N¨utzel, K. (1991). The length of attractors in asymmetric random neural net-

works with deterministic dynamics. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and

General, 24, L151.

Perin, R., Berger, T. K., & Markram, H. (2011). A synaptic organizing principle

for cortical neuronal groups. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

108, 5419–5424.

Pfeiﬀer, B. E., & Foster, D. J. (2015). Autoassociative dynamics in the genera-

tion of sequences of hippocampal place cells. Science, 249, 180–183.

Rolls, E. T. (2012).
Advantages of dilution in the connectivity of attractor

networks in the brain. Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, 1, 44–

45.

Sompolinsky, H., Crisanti, A., & Sommers, H. J. (1988).
Chaos in random

neural networks. Physical Review Letters, 61, 259.

Tanaka, F., & Edwards, S. F. (1980).
Analytic theory of the ground state

properties of a spin glass. I. Ising spin glass. Journal of Physics F: Metal

Physics, 10, 2769–2778.

Tang, G., Gudsnuk, K., Kuo, S.-H., Cotrina, M., Rosoklija, G., Sosunov, A.,

Sonders, M., Kanter, E., Castagna, C., Yamamoto, A., Yue, Z., Arancio, O.,

Peterson, B., Champagne, F., Dwork, A., Goldman, J., & Sulzer, D. (2014).

Loss of mTOR-Dependent Macroautophagy Causes Autistic-like Synaptic

Pruning Deﬁcits. Neuron, 83, 1131–1143.

Toyoizumi, T., & Huang, H. (2015). Structure of attractors in randomly con-

nected networks. Physical Review E, 91, 032802.

30

van Vreeswijk, C., & Sompolinsky, H. (1998).
Chaotic Balanced State in a

Model of Cortical Circuits. Neural Computation, 10, 1321–1371.

Wainrib, G., & Touboul, J. (2013). Topological and dynamical complexity of

random neural networks. Physical Review Letters, 110, 118101.

Witter, M. P. (2010). Connectivity of the Hippocampus. In Hippocampal Mi-

crocircuits (pp. 5–26).

31