Will it Blend?
Composing Value Functions in Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin van Niekerk * 1 Steven James * 1 Adam Earle 1 Benjamin Rosman 1 2

Abstract

has so far been restricted to the tabular case with known
dynamics, limiting its usefulness.

An important property for lifelong-learning
agents is the ability to combine existing skills
to solve unseen tasks. In general, however, it is
unclear how to compose skills in a principled way.
We provide a “recipe” for optimal value function
composition in entropy-regularised reinforcement
learning (RL) and then extend this to the standard
RL setting. Composition is demonstrated in a
video game environment, where an agent with an
existing library of policies is able to solve new
tasks without the need for further learning.

arXiv:1807.04439v1 [cs.LG] 12 Jul 2018

Related work has focused on entropy-regularised reinforce-
ment learning (RL) (Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al.,
2017; Nachum et al., 2017), where rewards are augmented
with an entropy-based penalty term. This has been shown
to lead to improved exploration and rich, multimodal value
functions.

Prior work (Haarnoja et al., 2018) has demonstrated that
these value functions can be composed to approximately
solve the intersection of tasks. We complement these results
by proving optimal composition for the union of tasks in the
total-reward, absorbing-state setting. Thus, any task lying in
the “span” of a set of basis tasks can be solved immediately,
without any further learning. We provide a “recipe” for
optimally composing value functions, and demonstrate our
method in a video game. Results show that an agent is able
to compose existing policies learned from pixel input to
generate new, optimal behaviours.

1. Introduction

A major challenge in artiﬁcial intelligence is creating agents
capable of leveraging existing knowledge for inductive trans-
fer. Lifelong learning, in particular, requires that an agent
be able to act effectively when presented with a new, un-
seen task. A promising approach is to combine behaviours
learned in various separate tasks to create new skills (Taylor
& Stone, 2009). This compositional approach allows us to
build rich behaviours from relatively simple ones, resulting
in a (good!) combinatorial explosion in the agent’s abilities
(Saxe et al., 2017). However, in general, it is unclear how to
produce new optimal skills from known ones.

2. Background

A Markov decision process (MDP) is deﬁned by the 4-tuple
(S, A, ρ, r) where (i) the state space S is standard Borel;
(ii) the action space A is ﬁnite (and therefore a compact
metric space when equipped with the discrete metric); (iii)
the transition dynamics ρ deﬁne a Markov kernel (s, a) 7→
ρ(s,a) from S ×A to S; and (iv) the reward r is a real-valued
function on S × A that is bounded and measurable.

One approach to compositionality is Linearly-solvable
Markov Decision Processes (LMDPs) (Todorov, 2007),
which structure the reward function to ensure that the Bell-
man equation becomes linear in the exponentiated value
function. Todorov (2009) proves that the optimal value
functions of a set of LMDPs can be composed to produce
the optimal value function for a composite task. This is a
particularly attractive property, since solving new tasks re-
quires no further learning. However, the LMDP framework

In RL, an agent’s goal is to maximise its utility by making a
sequence of decisions. At each time step, the agent receives
an observation from S and executes an action from A ac-
cording to its policy. As a consequence of its action, the
agent receives feedback (reward) and transitions to a new
state. Whereas the rewards represent only the immediate
outcome, the utility captures the long-term consequences
of actions. Historically, many utility functions have been
investigated (Puterman, 2014), but in this paper we only
consider the total-reward criterion (see Section 2.1).

1University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
2Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Pretoria, South
Africa.
Correspondence to:
Benjamin van Niekerk <ben-

The 2 nd Lifelong Learning: A Reinforcement Learning Approach
(LLARLA) Workshop, Stockholm, Sweden, FAIM 2018. Copyright
2018 by the author(s).

We consider the class of MDPs with an absorbing set G,
which is a Borel subset of the state space. We augment the

state space with a virtual state g such that ρ(s,a)({g}) = 1
for all (a, s) in G × A, and r = 0 after reaching g. In
the control literature, this class of MDPs is often called
stochastic shortest path problems (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis,
1991), and naturally model domains that terminate after the
agent achieves some goal.

policy ¯π at state s. When ¯π is the uniform random policy,
the regularised reward is equivalent to the standard entropy
bonus up to an additive constant (Schulman et al., 2017).
This results in policies that are more robust to “winner’s
curse” (Fox et al., 2016). Additionally, the reference pol-
icy can be used to encode prior knowledge through expert
demonstration.

We restrict our attention to stationary Markov policies, or
simply policies. A policy s 7→πs is a Markov kernel from S
to A. Together with an initial distribution ν over S, a policy
deﬁnes a probability measure over trajectories. To formalise
this, we construct the set of n-step histories inductively by
deﬁning H0 = S and Hn = Hn−1 ×A×S for n in N. The
n-step histories represent the set of all possible trajectories
of length n in the MDP. The probability measure on Hn
induced by the policy π is then

Based on the above regularisation, we deﬁne the n-step
value function starting from s and following policy π as:

"n−1
X

#

Vπ,n(s) = Eπ
s,n

t=0
r(st, at) −τKL[πst||¯πst]

.

Note that since the KL-divergence term is measurable
(Dupuis & Ellis, 2011, Lemma 1.4.3), Vπ,n is well-deﬁned.
The inﬁnite-horizon value function, which represents the
total expected return after executing π from s, is then

P π
ν,n = ν ⊗π ⊗ρ ⊗· · · ⊗π ⊗ρ
|
{z
}
n times
.

Vπ(s) = lim sup
n→∞Vπ,n(s).

Using the standard construction (Klenke, 1995), we can
deﬁne a unique probability measure P π
ν on H∞consistent
with the measures P π
ν,n in the sense that

Since the reward function and KL-divergence are bounded,1

Vπ is well deﬁned. Similarly, we deﬁne the Q-function to
be the expected reward after taking action a in state s, and
thereafter following policy π:

P π
ν (E × A × S × A × · · · ) = P π
ν,n(E),

for any n in N and any Borel set E ⊆Hn. If ν is con-
centrated on a single state s, we simply write P π
ν = P π
s .
Additionally for any real-valued bounded measurable func-
tion f on Hn, we deﬁne Eπ
ν[f] to be the expected value of
f under P π
ν .

Qπ(s, a) = r(s, a) +
Z

S
Vπ(s′)ρ(a,s)(ds′).
(1)

Given the deﬁnitions above, we say that a measurable func-
tion V ∗is optimal if V ∗(s) = supπ Vπ(s) for all s in S.
Furthermore, a policy π∗is optimal if Vπ∗= V ∗.

Finally, we introduce the notion of a proper policy—a policy
under which the probability of reaching G after n steps
converges to 1 uniformly over S as n →∞. Our deﬁnition
extends that of Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1995) to general
state spaces, and is equivalent to the deﬁnition of transient
policies used by James & Collins (2006):

In the standard RL case, the optimal policy is always de-
terministic and is deﬁned by argmaxa Q∗(s, a). On the
other hand, entropy-regularised problems may not admit
an optimal deterministic policy. This results from the KL-
divergence term, which penalises deviation from the refer-
ence policy ¯π. If ¯π is stochastic, then a deterministic policy
may incur more cost than a stochastic policy. To see this,
consider the simple two-state MDP shown in Figure 1:

Deﬁnition 1. A stationary Markov policy π is said to be
proper if

∞
X

t=0
P π
s (st ̸∈G) < ∞.

sup
s∈S

s
g
r(s, Right) = −1
r(s, Left) = −1

Otherwise, we say that π is improper.

2.1. Entropy-Regularised RL

Figure 1. A two-state MDP with absorbing state g.

In the standard RL setting, the expected reward at state s un-
der policy π is given by Ea∼π [r(s, a)]. Entropy-regularised
RL (Ziebart, 2010; Fox et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017;
Schulman et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2017) augments the
reward function with a term that penalises deviating from
some reference policy ¯π. That is, the expected reward is
given by Ea∼π [r(s, a)] −τKL[πs||¯πs], where τ is a pos-
itive scalar temperature parameter and KL[πs||¯πs] is the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between π and the reference

Given τ > 0 and a uniformly random reference policy,
let π be the deterministic policy that selects Right with
probability 1, and let πε be the stochastic policy that selects
Right with probability 1 −ε and Left with probability

1Under the assumptions that A is ﬁnite and ¯π is chosen so that
πs is absolutely continuous with respect to ¯πs for any state s and
policy π.

ε. Then, choosing ε small enough, we can guarantee that
Vπε > Vπ. Therefore for any τ > 0, the optimal policy is
non-deterministic.

We also deﬁne the soft Bellman operator

[LVπ](s) = τ log
Z

A
exp (Qπ(s, a)/τ) πs(da).
(5)

Proof. First, the value of state s under the policy π is given
by Vπ(s) = −1 −τ log 2. On the other hand, the expected
number of steps from s to g under πε is 1/(1 −ε) so we
have

Here L is referred to as “soft”, since it is a smooth approxi-
mation of the max operator. The soft Bellman operator is
connected to the Bellman optimality operator through the
following result:

Lemma 1. Let V : S →R be a bounded measurable
function. Then T V = LV and the supremum is attained
uniquely by the Boltzmann policy B[V ] deﬁned by

Vπε(s) = −1 + ε log 2ε

1 −ε
−log 2(1 −ε).

Now, choose ε such that

d¯πs
(a) =
exp

Q(s, a)/τ

R

dBs[V ]

ε < τ(log 2 −1/2)

A exp

Q(s, a′)/τ

¯π(da′|s).

2 + τ
.
(2)

Then, from (2) we have that:

Proof. Follows directly from Dupuis & Ellis (2011, Propo-
sition 1.4.2).

(i) ε < 1/2 and therefore log 2(1 −ε) < 0,
(ii) log 2ε < 2ε, and
(iii) log 2 −1/2 < 1 and therefore ε < τ/(2 + τ)

Analogous to the standard RL setting, we can deﬁne value
and policy iteration in the entropy-regularised context,
where the Bellman operators are replaced with their “soft”
equivalents:

Using the above facts we get the chain of inequalities:

Vπε(s)
(i)> −1 + ε log(2ε)

(ii)
> −1 + 2ε

1 −ε

1 −ε

Algorithm 1 Soft Value Iteration

(iii)
> −1 −τ/2 −ε(2 + τ)

Input: MDP, temperature τ > 0, bounded function V
Output: Optimal value function V ∗

(2)> −1 −τ log 2.

initialize V ∗←V
repeat

The last inequality follows directly from (2), giving
Vπε(s) > Vπ(s).

replace V ←V ∗

apply soft Bellman operator V ∗←L[V ]
until convergence

3. Soft Value and Policy Iteration

In this section, we investigate the total-reward, entropy-
regularised criterion deﬁned above. While value and pol-
icy iteration in entropy-regularised RL have been analysed
previously (Nachum et al., 2017), convergence results are
limited to discounted MDPs. We sketch an argument that an
optimal proper policy exists under the total-reward criterion
and that the soft versions of value and policy iteration (see
Algorithms 1 and 2) converge to optimal solutions.

Algorithm 2 Soft Policy Iteration

Input: MDP, temperature τ > 0, proper policy π
Output: Optimal policy π∗

initialize π∗←π
repeat

replace π ←π∗

policy evaluation:

We begin by deﬁning the Bellman operators:

ﬁnd Vπ, the ﬁxed-point of Tπ
policy improvement:

[TπVπ](s) =
Z

compute the Boltzmann policy π∗←B[Vπ]
until convergence

A
Qπ(s, a)πs(da) −τKL[πs||¯πs],
(3)

[T V ](s) = sup
π [TπV ](s).
(4)

Following closely along the lines of Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis
(1991) and James & Collins (2006), but taking special care
to account for the fact that optimal policies are not necessar-
ily deterministic, it can be shown that the above algorithms
converge to optimal solutions.

Equations (3) and (4) are analogous to the standard Bellman
operator and Bellman optimality operator respectively. Note
that since the optimal policy may not be deterministic, the
Bellman optimality operator selects the supremum over
policies instead of actions.

and deﬁne the operator U on the space of non-negative
bounded measurable functions by

Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 (James &
Collins, 2006) hold and that the optimal value function is
bounded above. Then:

[UZ](s, a) = exp (r(s, a)/τ)
Z

A
Z(f(s, a), a)¯πs(da′).

(i) there exists an optimal proper policy;
(ii) the optimal value function is the unique bounded mea-
surable solution to the optimality equation;
(iii) the soft policy iteration algorithm converges to the
policy starting from any proper policy;
(iv) the soft value iteration algorithm converges to the opti-
mal value function starting from any proper policy.

We now show that the desirability function of Q∗
τ is a ﬁxed
point of U. Since V ∗
τ is the ﬁxed point of the Bellman
optimality operator, by combining Equation (1), Lemma 1
and Theorem 1, we have

V ∗
τ (s) = τ log
Z

A
exp (Q∗
τ(f(s, a), a′)/τ) ¯πs(da′)

4. Compositionality

and Q∗
τ(s, a) = r(s, a) + V ∗
τ (f(s, a)).

In lifelong learning, an agent is presented with a series of
tasks drawn from some distribution. The goal is to exploit
knowledge gained in previous tasks to improve performance
in the current task. We consider an environment with ﬁxed
state space S, action space A, deterministic transition dy-
namics ρ, and absorbing set G. Let D be a ﬁxed but unknown
distribution over (S, A, ρ, r). The agent is then presented
with tasks sampled from D, which differ only in their re-
ward functions. In this section, we describe a compositional
approach for tackling this problem.

Then it follows that

[UZ∗
τ ](s, a) = er(s,a)/τ
Z
exp (Q∗
τ/τ) d(ρ(s,a) ⊗¯πs)

= er(s,a)/τ exp (V ∗
τ (f(s, a))/τ) = Z∗
τ (s, a).

Hence Z∗
τ is a ﬁxed point of U. Under the assumptions on
the reward function r, the optimal Q-value satisﬁes Q∗
τ =
τ log (|| exp(Q∗
τ/τ)||w) on G. Therefore, restricted to G,
Z∗
τ is a linear combination of the desirability functions for
the family of tasks. Since (6) holds on G and it is clear that
U is a linear operator, then (6) holds everywhere.

Suppose that the reward functions drawn from D differ only
on the absorbing set G. This restriction was introduced
by Todorov (2009), and is a strict subset of the successor
representations framework (Dayan, 1993; Barreto et al.,
2017). Given a library of previously-solved tasks, we can
combine their Q-functions to solve any task lying in the
“span” of the library without further learning:

The following lemma links the previous result to the stan-
dard RL setting. Recall that entropy-regularisation appends
a temperature-controlled penalty term to the reward func-
tion. As the temperature parameter tends to 0, the reward
provided by the environment dominates the entropy penalty,
and the problem reduces to the standard RL case:

Theorem 2 (Optimal Composition). Let M1, . . . , Mn be
a library of tasks drawn from D. Let Q∗,k
τ
be the optimal
entropy-regularised Q-function, and rk be the reward func-
tion for Mk. Deﬁne the vectors

Lemma 2. Let {τn}∞
n=1 be a sequence in R such that τn ↓
0. Let Q∗
τn be the optimal Q-value function for MDP(τn):
the entropy-regularised MDP with temperature parameter
τn. Let Q∗
0 be the optimal Q-value for the standard MDP.
Then Q∗
τn ↑Q∗
0 as n →∞.

r = [r1, . . . , rn]
and
Q∗
τ = [Q∗,1
τ , . . . , Q∗,n
τ
].

Given a set of non-negative weights w, with ||w||1 = 1,
consider a further task drawn from D with reward function
satisfying r = τ log (|| exp(r/τ)||w) for all s in G, where
|| · ||w denotes the weighted 1-norm. Then the optimal
Q-value for this task is given by:

Proof. First note that for a ﬁxed policy π, state s and action
a, we have Qπ
τn(s, a) ↑Qπ
0(s, a) as n →∞. This follows
directly from the deﬁnition of the entropy-regularised value
function, and the fact that the KL-divergence is non-negative.
Then using Lemma 3.14 (Hinderer, 1970) to interchange
the limit and supremum, we have

Q∗
τ = τ log (|| exp(Q∗
τ/τ)||w) .
(6)

That is, the optimal Q-functions for the library of tasks can
be composed to form Q∗
τ.

lim
n→∞Q∗
τn = lim
n→∞sup
π Qπ
τn = sup
π
lim
n→∞Qπ
τn

= sup
π Qπ
0 = Q∗
0.

Proof. Since ρ is deterministic, we can ﬁnd a measurable
function f : S × A →S such that ρ(s,a) = δf(s,a). For any
Q-function, deﬁne the desirability function

Since Qπ
τn ↑Qπ
0, we have Q∗
τn ↑Q∗
0 as n →∞.

Finally, we show that composition holds in the standard RL
setting by taking the low-temperature limit of Theorem 2.

Z(s, a) = exp (Q(s, a)/τ) ,

Corollary 1. Let {τn}∞
n=1 be a sequence in R such that
τn ↓0. Then max Q∗
τn ↑Q∗
0 as n →∞.

Lemma 3 (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Let Q∗,1
τ
and Q∗,2
τ
be
the optimal Q-functions for two tasks drawn from D with
rewards r1 and r2. Deﬁne the averaged Q-function Qave :=
(Q∗,1
τ
+ Q∗,2
τ )/2. Then the optimal Q-function Q∗
τ for the
task with reward function r = (r1 + r2)/2 satisﬁes

Proof. For a ﬁxed state s and action a and a possible re-
ordering of the vector Q∗
0(s, a), we may suppose, without
loss of generality, that Q∗,1
0 (s, a) = max Q∗
0(s, a). Then
by Lemma 2, we can ﬁnd an N in N such that

Qave ≥Q∗
τ ≥Qave −C∗
τ ,

where C∗
τ is a ﬁxed point of

Q∗,1
τn (s, a) = max Q∗
τn(s, a) for all n ≥N.

τEs′∼ρ(s,a)
h
D 1

2

π∗,1
s ||π∗,2
s

+ max
a′ C(s′, a′)
i
,

Since log is continuous, we have from Theorem 2 that

the policy π∗,i
s
is the optimal Boltzmann policy for task i,
and D 1

lim
n→∞Q∗
τn = log

lim
n→∞|| exp(Q∗
τn)||1/τn
w

,

2 (·||·) is the R´enyi divergence of order 1

2.

Theorem 3 (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Using the deﬁnitions in
Lemma 3, the value of the composed policy πave satisﬁes

where || · ||p
w denotes the weighted p-norm. By factoring
exp(Q∗,1
τn ) out of || exp(Q∗
τn)||1/τn
w
, we are left with

Qπave ≥Q∗
τ −F ∗
τ ,

||1, exp(∆2), . . . , exp(∆k)||1/τn
w
,

where F ∗
τ is a ﬁxed point of

τEs′∼ρ(s,a)
h
Ea′∼πave
s′ [C∗
τ (s′, a′) −F(s′, a′)]
i
.

where ∆i = Q∗,i
τn −Q∗,1
τn for i = 2, . . . , k. Since Q∗,1
τn (s, a)
is the maximum of Q∗
τn(s, a) for all n ≥N, the limit as
n →∞of the above is 1. Then it follows that

We believe that the low-temperature result from Lemma 2
can be used to obtain similar results for the standard RL
framework. We provide empirical evidence of this in the
next section, and leave a formal proof to future work.

lim
n→∞Q∗,1
τn (s, a) = log

lim
n→∞exp(Q∗,1
τn (s, a))


= Q∗,1
0 (s, a).

Since s and a were arbitrary and Q∗,m
τn
↑Q∗,m
0
, we have
that max Q∗
τn ↑Q∗
0 as n →∞.

5. Experiments

To demonstrate composition, we perform a series of experi-
ments in a grid-world video game (Figure 2b). The goal of
the game is to collect items of different colours and shapes.
The agent has four actions that move it a single step in any
of the cardinal directions, unless it collides with a wall.Each
object in the domain is one of two shapes (squares and cir-
cles), and one of three colours (blue, beige and purple), for
a total of six objects (see Figure 2a).

Comparing Theorem 2 to Corollary 1, we see that as the
temperature parameter decreases to zero, the weight vector
has less inﬂuence on the composed Q-function. In the limit,
the optimal Q-function is independent of the weights and
is simply the maximum of the library functions. This sug-
gests a natural trade-off between our ability to interpolate
between Q-functions, and the stochasticity of the optimal
policy. Furthermore, Corollary 1 mirrors that of generalised
policy improvement (Barreto et al., 2017), which shows that
computing the maximum of a set of Q-functions results in an
improved Q-function. In our case, the resulting Q-function
is not merely an improvement, but is in fact optimal.

Beige
Blue
Purple

Square

The composition described in this section can be viewed as
an –OR– task composition: if objectives of two tasks are
to achieve goals A and B respectively, then the composed
Q-function will achieve A–OR–B optimally. Haarnoja et al.
(2018) show that an approximate –AND– composition is
also possible for entropy-regularised RL. That is, if the goals
A and B partially overlap, the composed Q-function will
achieve A–AND–B approximately. The idea is that the opti-
mal Q-function for the composite task can be approximated
by the average of the library Q-functions. We include their
results for completeness:

Circle

(a) Items to be collected.
(b) Layout of the grid-world.

Figure 2.

We construct a number of different tasks based on the objects
that the agent must collect, the task’s name specifying the
objects to be collected. For example, Purple refers to the
task where an agent must collect any purple object, while
BeigeSquare requires collecting the single beige square.

5.2. Linear Task Combinations

For each task, the episode begins by randomly positioning
the six objects and the agent. At each timestep, the agent
receives a reward of −0.1. If the correct object is collected,
the agent receives a reward of 1 and the episode terminates.
We ﬁrst learn to solve a number of base tasks using (soft)
deep Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015; Schulman et al., 2017),
where each task is trained with a separate network. The
resulting networks are collected into a library from which
we will later compose new Q-functions.

In Theorem 2 we showed that in the entropy-regularised
setting, the composed Q-function is dependent on a weight
vector w. This allows us to achieve a more general type of
composition. In particular, we can immediately compute
any optimal Q-function that lies in the “span” of the library
Q-functions. Indeed, according to Theorem 2 the exponen-
tiated optimal Q-function is a linear combination of the
exponentiated library functions. Therefore, the weights can
be used to modulate the relative importance of the library
functions—modelling the situation in which an agent has
multiple concurrent objectives of unequal importance.

The input to our network is a single RGB frame of size 84×
84, which is passed through three convolutional layers and
two fully-connected layers before outputting the predicted
Q-values for the given state. Using the results in Section 4,
we compose optimal Q-functions from those in the library.

We illustrate the effect of the weight vector w using soft Q-
learning with a temperature parameter τ = 1. We construct
a new task by composing the tasks PurpleCircle and
BeigeSquare, and assign different weights to these tasks.
The different weighted value functions are given in Figure 4.

5.1. –OR– Composition

Here we consider new tasks that can be described as the
union of a set of base tasks in the standard RL setting. We
train an agent separately on the Purple and Blue tasks,
adding the corresponding Q-functions to our library. We
use Corollary 1 to produce the optimal Q-function for the
composite PurpleOrBlue task, which requires the agent
to pick up either blue or purple objects, without any further
learning. Results are given in Figure 3.

5.3. –AND– Composition

Here we consider tasks which can be described as the inter-
section of tasks in the library. In general, this form of compo-
sition will not yield an optimal policy for the composite task
owing to the presence of local optima in the composed value
function. However, in many cases we can obtain a good
approximation to the composite task by simply averaging
the Q-values for the constituent tasks. While Haarnoja et al.
(2018) considers this type of composition in the entropy-
regularised case, we posit that this can be extended to the
standard RL setting by taking the low-temperature limit.
We illustrate this by composing the optimal policies for the
Blue and Square tasks, which produces a good approxi-
mation to the optimal policy for collecting the blue square.
Results are shown in Figure 5.

The local maxima over blue and purple objects illustrates
the multimodality of the value function (Figure 3a). This
is similar to approaches such as soft Q-learning (Haarnoja
et al., 2017), which are also able to learn multimodal poli-
cies. However, we have observed that directly learning a
truly multimodal policy for the composite task can be difﬁ-
cult. If the entropy regularisation is too high, the resulting
policy is extremely stochastic. Too low a temperature re-
sults in a loss of multimodality, owing to winner’s curse. It
is instead far easier to learn unimodal value functions for
each of the base tasks, and then compose them to produce
optimal multimodal value functions.

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 3. (a) The optimal value function for PurpleOrBlue, which is produced by composing the Purple and Blue Q-functions.
The multimodality of the composite value function is clearly visible. (b) Sample trajectories for the composite PurpleOrBlue task,
with the agent beginning at different positions. The agent selects the shortest path to any of the target objects. (c) Returns from 50k
episodes. The ﬁrst two box plots are the results of acting in the PurpleOrBlue task using only one of the base Q-functions, while the
third uses the composite Q-function.

(a) BeigeSquare: 0.0
(b) BeigeSquare: 0.05
(c) BeigeSquare: 0.1
(d) BeigeSquare: 0.5

80

Objects Collected

60

40

BeigeSquare

20

PurpleCircle

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0

BeigeSquare Weight

(e) BeigeSquare: 0.9
(f) BeigeSquare: 0.95
(g) BeigeSquare: 1.0

(h)

Figure 4. (a–g) Weighted composed value function for the task BeigeSquareOrPurpleCircle. The weight assigned to the Q-
function for BeigeSquare is varied from 0 to 1. (h) The number of beige squares compared to purple circles collected by the agent as
the weights are varied in steps of 0.05. Results for each weight were averaged over 80 runs of 100 episodes.

6. Conclusion

5.4. Temporal

Our ﬁnal experiment demonstrates the use of composition to
long-lived agents. We compose the base Q-functions for the
tasks Blue, Beige and Purple, and use the resulting Q-
function to solve the task of collecting all objects. Sample
trajectories are illustrated by Figure 6.

We showed that in entropy-regularised RL, value functions
can be optimally composed to solve the union of tasks.
Extending this result by taking the low-temperature limit,
we showed that composition is also possible in standard
RL. However, there is a trade-off between our ability to
smoothly interpolate between tasks, and the stochasticity of
the optimal policy. We demonstrated, in a high-dimensional
environment, that a library of optimal Q-functions can be
composed to solve composite tasks consisting of unions, in-
tersections or temporal sequences of simpler tasks. The pro-
posed compositional framework is a step towards lifelong-
learning agents that are able to combine existing skills to
solve new, unseen problems.

Despite the fact that the individual tasks terminate after
collecting the required object, if we allow the episode to
continue, the composed Q-function is able to collect all
objects in a greedy fashion. The above shows the power of
composition—if we possess a library of skills learned from
previous tasks, we can compose them to solve any task in
their union continually.

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 5. (a) The approximately optimal value function of the composed policies. Local optima are clearly visible. (b) Sample trajectories
from the composed policy beginning from different starting positions. The agent exhibits suboptimal, but sensible behaviour near beige
squares. (c) The IQR of returns from 50k episodes. The ﬁrst box plot is the return from the optimal solution to the union of tasks, the
second is the result of the approximate intersection of tasks, and the third is the true optimal policy.

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 6. (a) and (b) Sample trajectories for the task of collecting all objects. (c) Returns from 50k episodes. The ﬁrst box plot is the
return of the composed Q-function, while the second is the result of DQN trained to collect all objects explicitly.

References

Klenke, A. Probability Theory: A Comprehensive Course,
volume 158. 1995. ISBN 9781447153603.

Barreto, A., Dabney, W., Munos, R., Hunt, J., Schaul, T.,
van Hasselt, H., and Silver, D. Successor features for
transfer in reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 4055–4065, 2017.

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M.G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-
land, A.K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529, 2015.

Bertsekas, D.P. and Tsitsiklis, J.N. An analysis of stochas-
tic shortest path problems. Mathematics of Operations
Research, 16(3):580–595, 1991.

Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D.
Bridging the gap between value and policy based rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 2772–2782, 2017.

Bertsekas, D.P. and Tsitsiklis, J.N. Neuro-dynamic pro-
gramming: an overview. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control, volume 1, pp. 560–
564. IEEE, 1995.

Puterman, M.L.
Markov decision processes: discrete
stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons,
2014.

Dayan, P. Improving generalization for temporal difference
learning: The successor representation. Neural Computa-
tion, 5(4):613–624, 1993.

Saxe, A.M., Earle, A.C., and Rosman, B.S.
Hierarchy
through composition with multitask LMDPs. Proceed-
ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, 70:3017–3026, 2017.

Dupuis, P. and Ellis, R. A weak convergence approach to
the theory of large deviations. 2011.

Fox, R., Pakman, A., and Tishby, N. Taming the noise in
reinforcement learning via soft updates. In 32nd Confer-
ence on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2016.

Schulman, J., Abbeel, P., and Chen, X. Equivalence between
policy gradients and soft Q-learning. pp. 1–15, 2017.

Taylor, M.E. and Stone, P. Transfer learning for reinforce-
ment learning domains: a survey. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 10:1633–1685, 2009.

Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Re-
inforcement learning with deep energy-based policies.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
1352–1361, 2017.

Todorov, E. Linearly-solvable Markov decision problems.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 1369–1376, 2007.

Haarnoja, T., Pong, V., Zhou, A., Dalal, M., Abbeel, P., and
Levine, S. Composable deep reinforcement learning for
robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.06773,
2018.

Todorov, E. Compositionality of optimal control laws. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
1856–1864, 2009.

Hinderer, K. Foundations of non-stationary dynamic pro-
gramming with discrete time parameter. In Lecture Notes
in Operations Research and Mathematical Systems, vol-
ume 33. 1970.

Ziebart, B.D. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with
the principle of maximum causal entropy. Carnegie Mel-
lon University, 2010.

James, H.W. and Collins, E.J. An analysis of transient
Markov decision processes. Journal of applied probabil-
ity, 43(3):603–621, 2006.