Exploring Hierarchy-Aware Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Chris Cundy 1 Daniel Filan 1

Abstract

actions is inverse optimal control (K´alm´an, 1960) or inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL), formalised by Ng & Russell
(2000) and Abbeel & Ng (2004). In IRL we treat human
behaviour as planning in a Markov decision process (MDP)
and aim to ﬁnd a reward function that explains observed
trajectories of human agents.

We introduce a new generative model for human
planning under the Bayesian Inverse Reinforce-
ment Learning (BIRL) framework which takes
into account the fact that humans often plan using
hierarchical strategies. We describe the Bayesian
Inverse Hierarchical RL (BIHRL) algorithm for
inferring the values of hierarchical planners, and
use an illustrative toy model to show that BIHRL
retains accuracy where standard BIRL fails. Fur-
thermore, BIHRL is able to accurately predict
the goals of ‘Wikispeedia’ game players, with
inclusion of hierarchical structure in the model
resulting in a large boost in accuracy. We show
that BIHRL is able to signiﬁcantly outperform
BIRL even when we only have a weak prior on
the hierarchical structure of the plans available to
the agent, and discuss the signiﬁcant challenges
that remain for scaling up this framework to more
realistic settings.2

arXiv:1807.05037v1 [cs.AI] 13 Jul 2018

While we may naively assume that human beings always act
perfectly to achieve their goals (the ‘principle of revealed
preference’ in economics (Samuelson, 1938)), human be-
haviour often violates this assumption. In general, people
make choices that they admit are suboptimal, due to a va-
riety of biases including lack of willpower, inconsistent
time preferences, and lack of perfect foresight. Therefore,
a more accurate inference of ‘true’ preferences must take
typical human irrationality into account. Although initial
approaches to IRL followed this implicit assumption of ratio-
nality of the demonstrating expert, the more recent Bayesian
IRL framework (Ramachandran & Amir, 2007) makes it
straightforward to include more realistic models of human
behaviour. Previous work in this area has modelled human
actions as attempting to maximise their utility subject to con-
straints such as limited knowledge (Baker & Tenenbaum,
2014) or inconsistent time preferences (Evans et al., 2016).

1. Introduction

However, to our knowledge no previous work has consid-
ered what we believe to be a key feature of human planning:
a tendency to structure our decision-making in a hierarchi-
cal fashion. Instead of evaluating each individual action in
terms of the rewards which we expect to obtain from all
subsequent actions, humans tend to simplify their planning
by considering sub-problems and choosing between known
methods to solve these problems. For example, when navi-
gating across a city we might choose between existing skills
of walking, taking a taxi or public transport. We do not
choose between all the trajectories that we could physically
perform.

As Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have become
more and more capable, we are increasingly aware of the
limitations of how we specify their goals. While these goals
can be hand-crafted for simple environments, this approach
requires expert knowledge in the domain. If we are to
eventually use AI to perform tasks that are beyond human
abilities (e.g. ‘plan a city’), we have to develop a more
robust method of goal speciﬁcation. Our algorithms would
ideally be able to learn what goals they should pursue by
inferring human preferences: this is often known as value
learning, or preference elicitation.

A leading approach to value learning from observed human

If we simply apply existing algorithms to observations of
humans who plan in this way, we will fail to infer correct
preferences, running the risk of accidentally inferring patho-
logically wrong values in order to explain the hierarchically-
generated plans.

1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
Correspondence to: Chris J. Cundy

Accepted at the 1st Workshop on Goal Speciﬁcations for Reinforce-
ment Learning, FAIM 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018. Copyright
2018 by the author(s).
2Our implementation of the algorithm can be found at

Our key contributions are as follows:

• We introduce a generative model of human decisions

the termination function α(s) gives the probability that the
option terminates, after which the agent no longer follows
πo. These parameters deﬁne an exit distribution P o(s, s′)
giving the probability that the option o, if initiated in state s,
will terminate in state s′, and a reward function ro(s) giving
the expected reward for activating option o in state s. For
a given state-action sequence Ta, we can further consider
the consistent-exit distribution P oc(s, s′, Ta). This gives the
probability that taking the option o in state s results in the
option’s policy giving the exact state-action trajectory in Ta,
terminating in state s′. An action a in a state s in an MDP
can be described as a degenerate option where πo(a, s) = 1,
τ = {s}, and α(s1) = 1 if T(s1, s, a) ̸= 0. Our use of the
term ‘option’ includes these ‘atomic’ actions as a special
case.

as resulting from hierarchical planning, which uses
both primitive actions and extended options comprised
of sequences of actions.

• We discuss the theoretical justiﬁcation for considering
such a model and introduce a simple algorithm for
inference with hierarchically-generated trajectories.

• Evaluating our model on trajectories of players of the
‘Wikispeedia’ game shows us that incorporating hi-
erarchical structure gives us a sizeable boost in goal
prediction accuracy compared to standard Bayesian
IRL.

• Finally, we discuss how our inference procedure can
be extended to jointly infer options and preferences,
and show that our performance advantage over BIRL
is retained even when we don’t know what the precise
hierarchical structure of the agent is.

Thus the key features of our model are as follows:

• The human has an available set of options ω, which
include options with a policy that terminates after one
action, i.e. the standard actions in the MDP.

2. Our Model

An MDP is a tuple (S, A, T, R, γ) consisting of a set of
states S and actions A, a transition function T, reward func-
tion R, and discount rate γ, following the usual deﬁnition
in e.g. Sutton & Barto (1998). In IRL we are given an
MDP without R and aim to recover the reward from an
observed trajectory of an agent’s actions and entered states
at each timestep Ta = (s0, a0), (s1, a1), . . .. (We need to
include the states as actions do not uniquely map to states
in a stochastic MDP). We can typically extend the inference
over multiple observed trajectories.

• The human chooses between options o ∈ω with a
stochastic policy, π(s, o) ∝exp(βQ⊙(s, o)) for a
ﬁxed parameter β.

• We do not observe the sequence of options that the
agent executes: we only observe the sequence of states
and actions Ta, that the agent executes, some of which
may have been executed as part of a compound option.
We denote the unobserved state-option trajectory by
To.

We describe the behaviour of an agent in an MDP by a
stochastic policy π. We write the optimal policy as π∗,
with corresponding Q-function Q∗. Human planning is
commonly modelled as being Boltzmann-rational: that is,
satisfying π(s, a) ∝exp(βQ∗(s, a)) for a ﬁxed param-
eter β.
Boltzmann-policies can also be self-consistent,
so that the value-function is computed taking into ac-
count the Boltzmann-rational policy. This gives a policy
π(s, a) ∝exp(βQ⊙(s, a)), where Q⊙is the1 Q-value un-
der this same Boltzmann-rational policy. The parameter β
can be increased or decreased to model more or less rational
humans, respectively.

A key feature of our model is the inclusion of Boltzmann-
rational decisions over extended options as well as single
actions. We believe that this feature is important for accu-
rate modelling of human preferences, after considering the
common everyday situations where the human has options
that are well-suited to solving problems, but are not optimal.
The human might take those options instead of explicitly
computing the optimal policy because they have a limited
ability to optimally plan. For instance, if they wish to get
across the city, they might choose between a taxi and walk-
ing, as those skills have served them well in the past. They
might not even consider asking to borrow a friend’s bicycle,
even if this might be the fastest method, and certainly within
their abilities. We wouldn’t want our preference inference
algorithm to conclude that the human prefers sitting in taxis
because they chose to do that over taking the optimal policy.
For an overview of the psychology and neuroscience litera-
ture on the importance of hierarchy in human planning and
the neural basis thereof, see Botvinick et al. (2009).

One method for describing the behaviour of agents that plan
hierarchically is the options framework, comprehensively
described by Sutton et al. (1999). An option o consists
of a policy πo, an initiation set τ ⊆S, and a termination
function α : S →[0, 1]. The initiation set τ ⊆S gives the
states where the agent may activate the policy, thereafter
following the policy πo. At each state s the policy enters,

1In general there is no unique consistent Boltzmann-policy
(Asadi & Littman, 2016). In practice we have not noticed any
problems arising from this non-uniqueness.

3. Related Work

R
R1
G

3.1. Boltzmann-rationality

The Boltzmann-rationality model of human behaviour is
one of the simplest variations on the naive assumption that
humans are completely rational, and has a long history in
the literature. While it violates certain assumptions of how
agents should act, such as the principle of independence
of irrelevant alternatives introduced by Debreu (1960), in
practice the model has found widespread use in explaining
how people make bets (Rieskamp, 2008); in modelling the
attention of people looking at adverts (Yang et al., 2015);
and understanding the decisions taken in the brain itself
(Glascher et al., 2010).

B
B1
Y

Figure 1. The modiﬁed taxi-driver situation considered here. Two
trajectories shown are drawn from an agent that has hierarchical
options go to R1 and go to B1. In both trajectories the pas-
senger starts at R, while the destination is B in the ﬁrst and G in the
second. Greyed-out cells represent destinations of the options in
the uniform prior over option-sets used in section 8.

Previous work (Ortega & Braun, 2013) has shown how
a modiﬁed Boltzmann-policy can arise from modelling
bounded agents as they trade off gains in utility against
expending energy to transform their prior probability distri-
butions into posterior distributions (quantiﬁed as a regulari-
sation on the relative entropy between the two distributions).
Under this framework, a Boltzmann-policy is the optimal
policy for an agent which starts out indifferent to its actions,
and can spend an amount of energy characterised by β on
investigating which actions are likely to give it high reward.
Seen through this lens, the Boltzmann-rational human agent
has a certain theoretical justiﬁcation, in addition to being
commonly used in practice.

whilst our approach assumes that human planners impose
this structure as a shortcut for efﬁcient planning, possibly
leading to hierarchically optimal but globally suboptimal
trajectories.

4. Taxi-Driver Environment

The taxi driver environment was ﬁrst introduced by Diet-
terich (2000) as an example of a task that is particularly
amenable to hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL)
methods. It is a useful running example to describe the
mechanics of hierarchical planning.

3.2. Incorporating human decision-making in IRL

Initial work on inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Rus-
sell, 2000) did not discuss the procedure the human used
to generate the policy and so implicitly assumed optimal-
ity of the human policy. Contemporary work in IRL tends
to build on one of two frameworks: Maximum Entropy
IRL, introduced by Ziebart et al. (2008); or Bayesian IRL
(BIRL), introduced by Ramachandran & Amir (2007). For
the present work, we work within the Bayesian IRL frame-
work due to its conceptual simplicity and straightforward
inversion of planning to inference. Recent work has also
built on BIRL to incorporate non-optimal human behaviour,
such as inconsistent time preferences (Evans et al., 2016) or
limited knowledge (Baker & Tenenbaum, 2014).

The problem consists of a 5×5 gridworld, depicted in ﬁgure
1, with four special landmarks, labelled R, G, B and Y. An
agent (the ‘taxi driver’) moves in this world, starting at a
random cell. Additionally, there is a passenger who ini-
tially starts from one of the landmark cells, with a randomly
chosen landmark as their destination. The driver has six dif-
ferent actions: as well as moving in the cardinal directions
with actions N, E, S, W, they can also attempt to Pickup or
Putdown the passenger. The environment gives rewards of
−1 on any movement action (attempts to move into walls or
outside the grid fail with no additional penalty), −10 on un-
successful attempts to Pickup or Putdown, and +20 on
successfully putting the passenger down at their destination,
at which point the episode terminates. The state consists of
the grid coordinate, the location of the passenger (either at
one of the four landmarks or in the taxi), and the desired
destination, giving 5 × 5 × 5 × 4 = 500 possible states.

The most closely related work is by Nakahashi et al. (2016),
who assume that humans attempt to fulﬁll a set of goals,
which may consist of subgoals. A Bayesian method is
then used to ﬁnd which parts of the observed trajectory
correspond to fulﬁlling each goal/subgoal.
While this
goal/subgoal setting seems a reasonable assumption for
many of the trajectories, an arbitrarily parameterised reward
function can more ﬂexibly model a wider variety of tasks,
requiring less domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Secondly, their
work assumes an inherent hierarchical structure of tasks,

When presented in previous work, the taxi driver is usu-
ally equipped with hierarchical options, such as Go to
x, where x is any of R, G, B, or Y and the environment is
used to show how these allow the problem to be solved

series of atomic options (North, West, . . .), or by execut-
ing the single compound option Go to B1. So we express
P(Ta|β, ω) in terms of the unobserved option-trajectories
Toi with
P(Ta|β, ω)
=
P

faster than without imposing this structure. Of course, it is
somewhat to be expected that an agent will do well if it is
provided with options that are exact sub-components of the
optimal policy π∗. We wish to consider the more realistic
setting where the taxi driver has skills that are well-suited
to the task at hand, but not optimal, i.e. they are not exact
sub-components of the optimal policy π∗, although they are
generally much more useful than random policies. Perhaps
the human knows how to get to their place of work which is
located in a cell to the right of B, so ﬁnds it easier to drive to
B by ﬁrst going to their place of work, then going west to B.

i P(Ta|To,i)P(To,i|β, ω).2

Then:

P(θ|Ta, β, ω) =
P

i P(Ta|To,i)P(To,i|β, ω, θ)P(θ)
P

i P(Ta|To,i)P(To,i|β, ω)
.

Once we have a trajectory in terms of options, the likelihood
of taking that trajectory is straightforward to compute given
our model of the stochastic human policy:

Since our aim is to perform IRL in the environment, we
consider the variant of the taxi-driver case with a partially
observed reward function. We know that the reward is as
described above, except that up to ﬁve cells have reward 0
to enter (instead of −1 in the standard formulation). We
can imagine this reward as modelling some areas with little
trafﬁc, or areas that the driver enjoys driving along to get to
the destination. This means that we are considering θ which
are drawn from a ﬁnite set with approximately 6.7 million
possible reward functions, parameterised by ﬁve coordinates
giving the locations of the free-to-enter cells.

exp(βQ⊙(sik, oik))
P

P(To,i|β, ω, θ) =
Y

o′∈ω exp(βQ⊙(sik, o′)),

k

where oik denotes the option chosen in the kth step of the ith

state-option trajectory, and sik denotes the corresponding
state. To get the probability of the trajectory we multiply
the probability of taking the individual option (given by
our Boltzmann-rational model) across all options in the
trajectory. The likelihood for multiple observed trajectories
follows straightforwardly.

Procedure 1 gives a method to compute all of the option-
trajectories which are consistent with a given action-
trajectory. This requires knowing the consistent-exit dis-
tribution P oc(si, si+k, Ta), as we need to know how likely
activating an option is to give us the observed trajectory.

5. Bayesian Description

Given a human state-action trajectory Ta and a set of possi-
ble options ω, we wish to compute the posterior distribution
over a particular parameterisation of the reward function θ.
In the taxi driver example, Ta corresponds to the sequence
of observed actions N, E, W, etc; ω is a set consisting of
concrete actions N, S . . . , along with some extended options
such as Go to B1.

Since we have to enumerate each state-option trajectory
To which can produce the observed state-action trajectory
Ta, we should consider how many of these state-option
trajectories we may have. The Taxi-Driver case has a few
‘landmark’ states which can be reached directly (via options)
by many other states, while most states can only be reached
by atomic actions from neighbouring states. If there are m
of these landmark states which can each be reached by n
other states, there are nm possible option-trajectories con-
sistent with the observed trajectory of actions. If we start
introducing many states which can be destinations of land-
marks, then the number of trajectories we have to consider
increases exponentially. Of course, in principle humans
can choose an arbitrary destination state for options, so in
general the complexity of evaluating the BIHRL algorithm
grows exponentially with the number of states in the prob-
lem.

In principle, there is no reason why we cannot consider op-
tions consisting of any stochastic policy, but in order to sim-
plify the experiments we choose to consider either options
with deterministic policies, or options which are themselves
Boltzmann-rational with parameter βo > β, where β is the
rationality parameter for the agent’s planning over top-level
options. This mirrors the everyday experience of having
a set of well-honed skills that we can count on to give us
the outcome we expect. We choose this model as we feel
it combines being able to plan at different levels of abstrac-
tion (modelled with the availability of multi-action options)
with the limited resources available to plan modelled by the
Boltzmann-rationality (Ortega & Braun, 2013).

We could consider pruning the trees of option-trajectories by
removing any trajectories that have a very low probability as
we create the sets of possible option-trajectories. However,
this requires that we are very conﬁdent in our model of
human behaviour in order to avoid removing trajectories
that we erroneously think are unlikely.

Our inference problem is given by

P(θ|Ta, β, ω) = P(Ta|β, ω, θ)P(θ)

P(Ta|β, ω)
.

Each observed state-action trajectory Ta could have been
produced by several state-option trajectories To,i, indexed
by i. For example, in the taxi-driver case, we don’t know if
the driver navigating to B1 is due to the driver executing a

2P(Ta|To,i) might be less than 1 if the option follows a stochas-
tic policy, e.g. an option which itself has a Boltzmann-policy.

Procedure 1 Computing the full set of option-trajectories
that are consistent with the observed state-action trajectory,
and their corresponding probability.
We successively step through the states in the observed
trajectory. At each state we search to ﬁnd all states that we
can reach by triggering options in the current state. We form
the list of all option-trajectories that can reach those states
by concatenating the options that reach them with the list of
options-trajectories that reach the current state.
We sucessively update two sets: Toi is the set of possible
option sequences that account for the ﬁrst i actions, and Poi
are the corresponding probabilities that each sequence of
options would produce the observed sequence of actions.

In:
• A computed optimal value function V ⊙
B under a
set of options ω with rationality parameter β
• A function P oc(si, si+k, Ta,i:i+k) as deﬁned in sec-
tion 2
• An observed state-action trajectory Ta of length n,
with sub-trajectories between the i and i + k states
Ta,i:i+k
Out: A set of all trajectories of options that are consis-
tent with the observed action-trajectory, along with the
corresponding probabilities that taking that trajectory of
options would result in the observed action-trajectory.
for i ∈{1, . . . , n} do

Figure 2. Bar chart showing the performance of the Bayesian IRL
algorithm, with and without knowledge of hierarchical plans, at
determining the true θ from n trajectories. Error bars show one
standard error in the mean over different MCMC seeds.

from a hierarchically-planning agent with a given true θ.
As we can see from the results in ﬁgure 2, our knowledge
of the hierarchical structure of the agent’s planning allows
us to discern the true θ much better than assuming that
the agent is merely a self-consistent Boltzmann planner.
We retain conﬁdence in the true θ when seeing more and
more trajectories, whilst the IRL algorithm without options
becomes increasingly convinced that the true θ is not the
correct reward.

Toi ←∅, Poi ←∅
end for
for i ∈{1, . . . , n} do

for k ∈{1, . . . , n −i} do

for Each o ∈ω with P oc(si, si+k, Ta,i:i+k) ̸= 0
do

Generate a set of option-paths by appending all
paths in Toi with o and append these new option-
paths to To(i+k).
Generate
the
corresponding
probability
by
multiplying
the
probabilities
in
Poi
by
P oc(si, si+k, Ta,i:i+k) and append these to
Po(i+k).
end for
end for
end for
return Ton, Pon

We can extend this simple example by analysing agents mov-
ing in much more complicated environments, or by attempt-
ing to infer the option-sets that the agents have available to
them. We perform both in the following two sections.

7. Large-Scale Analysis: Wikispeedia

Wikispeedia is an online game where players are given two
random articles from a subset of Wikipedia pages, and navi-
gate from one page to the other by clicking on hyperlinks,
attempting to ﬁnd the shortest path from the ﬁrst to the
second. We apply our algorithm to a public dataset of thou-
sands of Wikispeedia games, predicting the player’s target
Wikipedia page from the links traversed so far. This bench-
mark task has previously been studied by West & Leskovec
(2012). They hand-crafted a set of features, leaning heavily
on the textual information in the pages to explain human
planning in the space. We apply our self-consistent hierar-
chical Boltzmann planner to this task, to evaluate whether
it can achieve comparable performance without having to
featurise the graph by hand.

6. Taxi-Driver Experimental Results

To illustrate how we carry out inference in this framework,
we start by analysing our running example of the the taxi-
driver environment. We use a simple MCMC method based
on the Policy-Walk algorithm from Ramachandran &
Amir (2007), which we describe in Appendix A. We use
the family of reward functions described in section 4, and
place a uniform prior over the number of cells that are free
to enter, running our method over ﬁve trajectories drawn

This problem is conceptually similar to the taxi-driver prob-

over all trajectories in the training set, and choose η such
that the NLML is minimised.

To compare our hierarchical planning model with West &
Leskovec (2012), we consider trajectories u1, u2, . . . , un =
u1:n consisting of n visited articles u, and observe the ﬁrst
k nodes. We then look at the likelihood of predicting the
correct target node compared to predicting another node
chosen uniformly at random from the nodes with the same
shortest path length from uk. This is given by

P(θ|u1:k, η)
P(θ′|u1:k, η) = P(u1:k|θ, η)

P(u1:k|θ′, η).
(1)

Figure 3. Showing the negative log marginal likelihood on the train
set (lower is better) for various combinations of the rationality
constant β, and the number of hierarchical options m, with darker
bars corresponding to more available options.The rationality of the
options, βo, was ﬁxed at 3.0.

We want to evaluate the ratio above for all of the data in
the test set. Since the overwhelmingly most costly part
of computing P(u1:k|θ, η) is running the value iteration
until convergence for each possible goal θ, we are able to
speed up evaluation by precomputing the value functions
beforehand.

lem, except that the available actions are state-dependent,
consisting of the hyperlinks that may be clicked on each
page. In the actual game, the players are able to click the
‘back’ button on the browser, which injects an additional
action to consider. If we were to include this action we
would violate the Markov property of an MDP (or compli-
cate the analysis by squaring the size of the state space),
so we only consider those trajectories which don’t use the
back button. In order to simplify our algorithm, we also
ignore ‘dead-end’ pages which don’t link anywhere. Finally,
we removed paths longer than 20 steps long as they led to
computation difﬁculties and comprised less than 0.3% of
the dataset. We evenly split the paths in the dataset into a
training and testing set.

7.1. Results

Figure 3 shows that including a set of hierarchical options
decreases the NLML by a factor of two. When our agents
have no hierarchical actions, changing β has a negligible
effect on the NLML. We also observe that the minimal
NLML is obtained with a large set of around 150 available
hierarchical options. It seems reasonable to us that a typical
player may know one or two hundred topics well enough
to navigate expertly to them (with β0 = 3.0), whilst the
other randomly drawn topics are not known well at all (with
β = 0.4).

Figure 4 shows the predictive performance of our hierar-
chical model. We note that including hierarchical policies
provides a substantial beneﬁt over the BIRL baseline, taking
the accuracy from an average of 62% to 66%. The model
with hierarchical policies performs comparably to West &
Leskovec (2012)’s TF-IDF algorithm based on semantic
similarity of topics, although we remain below the state-of-
the-art results obtained by their hand-crafted featurisation.

We model the player as an agent with uniform rewards
of −1 on all state transitions except to the winning page,
which delivers reward +20. We postulate that humans may
choose long-time-scale strategies that attempt to navigate to
speciﬁc pages in particular. Hence, we equip our agent with
options that go to the m pages that appear most frequently
in the training set, with a common Boltzmann-rationality
parameter βo > β. As an example, the top ﬁve pages in the
training set were United States, Europe, United
Kingdom, England, and Earth. With the choices made
above, our agents are parameterised by the numbers m, β,
and βo. We kept βo ﬁxed at 3.0 as initial exploration showed
little variation for different values as long as they were
substantially greater than β. The discount rate γ was ﬁxed
at 0.9. In order to ﬁnd the the collection of hyperparameters
η = (β, m), that best characterises the data, we compute
the negative log marginal likelihood (NLML), given by

8. Inferring Option-Sets

If we don’t know the options available to the human, we
might want to infer what those are, and marginalise over
these, i.e. compute

P(θ|β, Ta) =
Z

Ω
P(θ|Ta, β, ω)P(ω)dω,

integrating over all sets of options ω in the space of possible
sets of options Ω. In general, there are a very large number
of possible options. Even simply considering deterministic
options, there are |S||A| possible options, and the set of
all possible sets of options is exponentially larger again:
|Ω| = 2|S||A|.

NLML = −log(P({(Ta, θ)}|η))

Y

!

∝−log

i
P(Ta,i|θi, η)

Figure 4. The accuracy on predicting θ for a path of length n given the ﬁrst k nodes.

Given the large size of the latent space, marginalising over
all option-sets to infer the posterior distribution over θ
quickly becomes computationally intractable. Future work
could try to tame this intractability by utilising recent ad-
vances in Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo approaches and vari-
ational inference. Here, we tackle the simpler case of the
taxi-driver with the naive MCMC approach to show that this
approach can learn interesting results.

We equip the MCMC method with a prior over Ωwhich is
uniform over all sets of up to three options, with each option
consisting of a deterministic policy that executes direction
steps in order to optimally navigate to a given destination
which is chosen from a set of 16 cells which are close to the
landmarks and shown in ﬁgure 1. Note that this excludes
the 9 cells in the middle of the grid which aren’t close to
any destinations. This captures the skills we would expect
a driver to use in the environment, with skills that go to
the areas of the grid that are near the landmarks where the
passengers are picked up and put down. We keep our prior
over θ as before.

Figure 5. Probabilities assigned to θ0, the ground truth reward,
when conditioned on ﬁve trajectories from a hierarchical planner
with β = 0.8, marginalising over the option-sets described in the
text.

9. Conclusion

8.1. Results

We have extended inverse reinforcement learning to infer
preferences from hierarchical planners which choose among
options with a self-consistent Boltzmann-policy. We show
that these agents capture many of the tradeoffs between the
reward and the cost of gathering information that humans
intuitively make.

The results in ﬁgure 5 show that even if we do not know the
options used to plan, but merely have a prior distribution
over them, BIHRL predicts the ground truth reward θ0 with
higher probability than BIRL. BIRL predicts a probability of
less than 0.03 and BIHRL a probability 0.55 at the ground-
truth β.

We introduce an inference algorithm based on the
Policy-Walk algorithm developed by Ramachandran
& Amir (2007) and show that it infers preferences of hi-
erarchical planners much more accurately than standard
Bayesian IRL on an illustrative toy example based on the
taxi-driver environment from Dietterich (2000). Further,
including a straightforward set of hierarchical plans signiﬁ-
cantly increases the accuracy of modelled human planning
in the ‘Wikispeedia’ dataset introduced by West & Leskovec
(2012), taking the accuracy from an average of 62% to 66%.

This experiment demonstrates that the BIHRL model is able
to infer the preferences from the actions of hierarchical
planners, without necessarily knowing the options a priori.
However, our naive MCMC method will not scale to sub-
stantially larger latent state spaces, such as the space of 150
latent options that would be required to extend this to the
Wikispeedia dataset.

Our method obtains comparable accuracy to the baseline
of West & Leskovec (2012), despite not relying on any
hand-engineered features.

Hierarchically organized behavior and its neural founda-
tions: a reinforcement learning perspective. Cognition,
113(3):262–280, 2009. URL
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2783353/.

We discussed how we would deal with the case where we
do not know our planners’ hierarchical options a priori, and
are forced to infer agents’ available options jointly along
with the reward. We introduce a toy MCMC approach that
is able to infer the correct option-sets and reward for small
environments. Given the correct β, BIHRL assigns 20 times
more probability mass to the ground-truth θ than standard
BIRL.

Debreu, G´erard. Topological Methods in Cardinal Util-
ity Theory. Mathematical Methods in the Social Sci-
ences, Stanford University Press, 1960, pp. 16–26,
1960. URL
RePEc:cwl:cwldpp:76.

Dietterich, Thomas G.
Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning with the MAXQ Value Function Decompo-
sition. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 13:
227–303, 2000.
ISSN 10769757.
doi:
10.1613/
jair.639.
URL
php/jair/article/view/10266.

However, at present signiﬁcant challenges remain for us-
ing BIHRL in practical environments, consisting of long
trajectories of agents with complex options. The large num-
ber of possible options that realistic planners could use
means that any inference procedure must deal with very
high-dimensional probability distributions, while the rel-
ative complexity of actual human options means that it
is computationally intractable to generate the exponential
numbers of plausible option-trajectories that are consistent
with the observed action-trajectory. It is possible that very
good models of human behaviour may be able to cut down
the exponential numbers of human choices, by assigning
strong priors over which human behvaiors and actions are
likely. Furthermore, modern Hamiltonian MC and varia-
tional inference may be able to assist with the inference in
high-dimensional spaces. If we can solve these daunting
problems, we may be able to use BIHRL to more accu-
rately infer human preferences in a variety of complicated
situations.

Evans, Owain, Stuhlm¨uller, Andreas, and Goodman,
Noah D. Learning the Preferences of Ignorant, Incon-
sistent Agents. Proceedings of the 30th Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI 2016), pp. 323–329, 2016.
URL

Glascher, Jan, Daw, Nathaniel, Dayan, Peter, and O’Doherty,
John P.
States versus Rewards: Dissociable neural
prediction error signals underlying model-based and
model-free reinforcement learning. Neuron, 66(4):585–
595, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.016.States.
URL

science/article/pii/S0896627310002874.

K´alm´an, Rudolf E.
Contributions to the theory of
optimal control.
Boletin de la Sociedad Matem-
atica Mexicana, 5:102–119, 1960.
URL
//pdfs.semanticscholar.org/4602/
a97c4965a9f6c41c9a7eeaef5be8333dbaef.
pdf.

References

Abbeel, Pieter and Ng, Andrew Y.
Apprenticeship
learning via inverse reinforcement learning.
Twenty-
ﬁrst international conference on Machine learning
- ICML ’04,
pp. 1–8,
2004.
doi:
10.1145/
1015330.1015430.
URL
org/citation.cfm?doid=1015330.1015430.

Nakahashi, Ryo, Baker, Chris L., and Tenenbaum, Joshua B.
Modeling Human Understanding of Complex Intentional
Action with a Bayesian Nonparametric Subgoal Model.
Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence (AAAI 2016), pp. 3754–3760, 2016.
URL

Asadi, Kavosh and Littman, Michael L. A New Softmax
Operator for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv, 2016. URL

Ng, Andrew and Russell, Stuart. Algorithms for inverse
reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the Seventeenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, 0:663–
670, 2000. ISSN 00029645. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.67.2.323.
URL
ang/papers/icml00-irl.pdf.

Baker,
Chris
L.
and
Tenenbaum,
Joshua
B.
Modeling
Human
Plan
Recognition
using
Bayesian
Theory
of
Mind.
Plan,
Activity,
and Intent Recognition,
pp. 1–24,
2014.
doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-398532-3.00007-5. URL
//pdfs.semanticscholar.org/4cbb/
1ea46c09d11b0b986a7baaac7215006504f8.
pdf.

Ortega, Pedro A. and Braun, Daniel A. Thermodynamics as
a theory of decision-making with information-processing
costs. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 469, 2013. ISSN

Botvinick, Matthew M, Niv, Yael, and Barto, Andrew C.

A. MCMC Sampling Procedure

1364-5021.
doi:
10.1098/rspa.2012.0683.
URL

org/content/469/2153/20120683.short.

Procedure 2 MCMC sampling in the latent space of Θ, Ω.

In:
• A set of possible reward functions Θ

Ramachandran, Deepak and Amir, Eyal. Bayesian inverse
reinforcement learning. IJCAI International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 2586–2591, 2007.
ISSN 10450823.
URL
Papers/IJCAI/2007/IJCAI07-416.pdf.

• A set of possible options Ω

• A set of trajectories Ta,i
Out: Samples from the posterior distribution P(θ, ω|Ta, β)

Rieskamp, J¨org.
The probabilistic nature of pref-
erential choice.
Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(6):1446–
1465, 2008.
ISSN 1939-1285.
doi:
10.1037/
a0013646. URL
cfm?doi=10.1037/a0013646.

p ←0.5
V ←0
θ ←Random Draw(Θ)
ω ←Random Draw(Ω)
Samples ←Empty list
repeat

Pick θ1 and ω1 randomly amongst the neighbours of θ,
ω
V1 ←Value Iteration(β, ω1, θ1), where the value it-
eration is initialised with V
Compute p1 = P(Ta|β, ω1, θ1) × P(ω1|Ω)
With probability min(1, p1/p):
p ←p1
V ←V1
θ ←θ1
ω ←ω1
Append (θ, ω) to Samples
until Desired number of samples obtained
return Samples

Samuelson, Paul A. A Note on the Pure Theory of Con-
sumer’s Behaviour. Economica, 5(17):61–71, 1938. ISSN
00130427, 14680335.
doi: 10.2307/2548836.
URL

Sutton, Richard S and Barto, Andrew G.
Reinforce-
ment learning:
An introduction.
MIT press Cam-
bridge, 1998.
URL
net/book/the-book.html.

Sutton, Richard S, Precup, Doina, and Singh, Satinder.
Between MDPs and semi-MDPs:
A framework for
temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning.
Ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
URL

viewcontent.cgi?article=1212&context=
cs_faculty_pubs.

West, Robert and Leskovec, Jure. Human wayﬁnding in in-
formation networks. Proceedings of the 21st international
conference on World Wide Web, pp. 619–628, 2012. doi:
10.1145/2187836.2187920. URL
mpi-sws.org/networks-seminar/papers/
wayfinding-www12.pdf.

Yang, Liu (Cathy), Toubia, Olivier, and De Jong, Martijn G.
A Bounded Rationality Model of Information Search and
Choice in Preference Measurement. Journal of Marketing
Research, 52(2):166–183, 2015. ISSN 0022-2437. doi:
10.1509/jmr.13.0288. URL
org/doi/10.1509/jmr.13.0288.

Ziebart, Brian D., Maas, Andrew, Bagnell, J. An-
drew,
and Dey,
Anind K.
Maximum Entropy
Inverse Reinforcement Learning.
AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1433–1438, 2008.
ISSN 10450823.
URL
Papers/AAAI/2008/AAAI08-227.pdf.