Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural
Networks for Document Classi’¼ücation

Jader AbreuŌŗå, Luis FredŌŗå, David Mac╦åedo, and Cleber Zanchettin

Centro de Inform┬┤atica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
50.740-560, Recife, PE, Brazil

arXiv:1901.06610v2 [cs.CL] 28 Jun 2019

Abstract. Document classi’¼ücation is a challenging task with important
applications. The deep learning approaches to the problem have gained
much attention recently. Despite the progress, the proposed models do
not incorporate the knowledge of the document structure in the architec-
ture e’¼āciently and not take into account the contexting importance of
words and sentences. In this paper, we propose a new approach based on
a combination of convolutional neural networks, gated recurrent units,
and attention mechanisms for document classi’¼ücation tasks. The main
contribution of this work is the use of convolution layers to extract more
meaningful, generalizable and abstract features by the hierarchical rep-
resentation. The proposed method in this paper improves the results of
the current attention-based approaches.

Keywords: Text classi’¼ücation ┬Ę Attention mechanisms ┬Ę Document clas-
si’¼ücation ┬Ę Convolutional Neural Networks.

1
Introduction

Text classi’¼ücation is one of the most classical and important tasks in the ma-
chine learning ’¼üeld. The document classi’¼ücation, which is essential to organize
documents for retrieval, analysis, and curation, is traditionally performed by
classi’¼üers such as Support Vector Machines or Random Forests. As in di’¼Ćerent
areas, the deep learning methods are presenting a performance quite superior
to traditional approaches in this ’¼üeld [5]. Deep learning is also playing a central
role in Natural Language Processing (NLP) through learned word vector repre-
sentations. It aims to represent words in terms of ’¼üxed-length, continuous and
dense feature vectors, capturing semantic word relations: similar words are close
to each other in the vector space.
In most NLP tasks for document classi’¼ücation, the proposed models do not
incorporate the knowledge of the document structure in the architecture e’¼ā-
ciently and not take into account the contexting importance of words and sen-
tences. Much of these approaches do not select qualitative or informative words

ŌŗåAuthors contributed equally and are both ’¼ürst authors.

2
Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.

and sentences since some words are more informative than others in a docu-
ment. Moreover, these models are frequently based on recurrent neural networks
only [6]. Since CNN has leveraged strong performance on deep learning models
by extracting more abundant features and reducing the number of parameters,
we guess it not only improves computational performance but also yields better
generalization on neural models for document classi’¼ücation.
A recent trend in NLP is to use attentional mechanisms to modeling informa-
tion dependencies without regard to their distance between words in the input
sequences. In [6] is proposed a hierarchical neural architecture for document
classi’¼ücation, which employs attentional mechanisms, trying to mirror the hier-
archical structure of the document. The intuition underlying the model is that
not all parts of a text are equally relevant to represent it. Further, determining
the relevant sections involves modeling the interactions and importance among
the words and not just their presence in the text.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for document classi’¼ücation based
on CNN, GRU [4] hidden units and attentional mechanisms to improve the
model performance by selectively focusing the network on essential parts of the
text sentences during the model training. Inspired by [6], we have used the hi-
erarchical concept to better representation of document structure. We call our
model as Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural Networks (HAHNN). We also
used temporal convolutions [2], which give us more ’¼éexible receptive ’¼üeld sizes.
We evaluate the proposed approach comparing its results with state-of-the-art
models and the model shows an improved accuracy.

2
Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural Networks

The HAHNN model combines convolutional layers, Gated Recurrent Units, and
attention mechanisms. Figure 1 shows the proposed architecture. The ’¼ürst layer
of HAHNN is a pre-processed word embedding layer (black circles in the Fig-
ure 1). The second layer contains a stack of CNN layers that consist of con-
volutional layers with multiple ’¼ülters (varying window sizes) and feature maps.
We also have performed some trials with temporal convolutional layers with di-
lated convolutions and gotten promising results. Besides, we used Dropout for
regularization. In the next layers, we use a word encoder applying the attention
mechanism on word level context vector. In sequence, a sentence encoder apply-
ing the attention on sentence-level context vector. The last layer uses a Softmax
function to generate the output probability distribution over the classes.
We use CNN to extract more meaningful, generalizable and abstract features
by the hierarchical representation. Combining convolutional layers in di’¼Ćerent
’¼ülter sizes with both word and sentence encoder in a hierarchical architecture let
our model extract more rich features and improves generalization performance in
document classi’¼ücation. To obtain representations of more rare words, by taking
into account subwords information, we used FastText [3] in the word embedding
initialization.
We investigate two variants of the proposed architecture. There is a basic ver-
sion, as described in Figure 1, and there is another which implements a TCN [2]

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
3

layer. The goal is to simulate RNNs with very long memory size by adopting a
combination of dilated and regular convolutions with residual connections. Di-
lated convolutions are considered bene’¼ücial in longer sequences as they enable
an exponentially larger receptive ’¼üeld in convolutional layers. More formally, for
a 1-D sequence input x ŌłłRn and a ’¼ülter f : {0, ..., k ŌłÆ1} ŌåÆR, the dilated
convolution operation F on element s of the sequence is de’¼üned as

kŌłÆ1
X

F(s) = (x ŌłŚd f)(s) =

i=o
f(i) ┬Ę xsŌłÆd┬Ęi
(1)

where d is the dilatation factor, k is the ’¼ülter size, and s ŌłÆd ┬Ę i accounts for
the past information direction. Dilation is thus equivalent to introducing a ’¼üxed
step between every two adjacent ’¼ülter maps. When d = 1, a dilated convolution
reduces to a regular convolution. The use of larger dilation enables an output
at the top level to represent a wider range of inputs, expanding the receptive ’¼üeld.

Fig. 1: Our HAHNN Architecture include an CNN layer after the embedding
layer. In addition, we have created a variant which includes a temporal convo-
lutional layer [2] after the embedding layer.

The proposed model takes into account that the di’¼Ćerent parts of a docu-
ment have no similar relevant information. Moreover, determining the relevant
sections involves modeling the interactions among the words, not just their iso-
lated presence in the text. Therefore, to consider this aspect, the model includes
two levels of attention mechanisms [1]. One structure at the word level and other
at the sentence level, which let the model pay more or less attention to individual
words and sentences when constructing the document representation.

4
Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.

The strategy consists of di’¼Ćerent parts: 1) A word sequence encoder and
a word-level attention layer; and 2) A sentence encoder and a sentence-level
attention layer. In the word encoder, the model uses bidirectional GRU [1] to
produce annotations of words by summarizing information from both directions.
Therefore, it incorporates the contextual information in the annotation. The
attention levels let the model pay more or less attention to individual words and
sentences when constructing the representation of the document [6].
Given a sentence with words wit, t Ōłł[0, T] and an embedding matrix We,
a bidirectional GRU contains the forward GRUŌłÆŌåÆf which reads the sentence si
from wi1 to wiT and a backward GRUŌåÉŌłÆf which reads from wiT to wi1:

xit = Wewit, t Ōłł[1, T],
(2)
ŌłÆŌåÆ
hit = ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆ
GRU(xit), t Ōłł[1, T],
(3)
ŌåÉŌłÆ
hit = ŌåÉŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆ
GRU(xit), t Ōłł[T, 1].
(4)

An annotation for a given word wit is obtained by concatenating the forward
hidden state and backward hidden state, i.e., hit = [ŌłÆŌåÆ
hit, ŌåÉŌłÆ
hit], which summarizes
the information of the whole sentence. We use the attention mechanism to eval-
uates words that are important to the meaning of the sentence and to aggregate
the representation of those informative words into a sentence vector. Speci’¼ücally,

uit = tanh(Wwhit + bw)
(5)
╬▒it =
exp(uŌŖż
ituw)
P

t exp(uŌŖż
ituw)
(6)

si =
X
╬▒ithit
(7)
The model measures the importance of a word as the similarity of uit with
a word level context vector uw and learns a normalized importance weight ╬▒it
through a softmax function. After that, the architecture computes the sentence
vector si as a weighted sum of the word annotations based on the weights. The
word context vector uw is randomly initialized and jointly learned during the
training process.
Given the sentence vectors si, and the document vector, the sentence atten-
tion is obtained as:
ŌłÆŌåÆ
hit = ŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆŌåÆ
GRU(si), i Ōłł[1, L],
(8)
ŌåÉŌłÆ
hit = ŌåÉŌłÆŌłÆŌłÆ
GRU(si), i Ōłł[L, 1].
(9)

The proposed solution concatenates hi = [ŌłÆŌåÆ
hi, ŌåÉŌłÆ
hi] hi which summarizes the
neighbor sentences around sentence i but still focus on sentence i. To reward
sentences that are relevant to correctly classify a document, the solution again
use attention mechanism and introduce a sentence level context vector us using
it to measure the importance of the sentences:
uit = tanh(Wshi + bs)
(10)
╬▒it =
exp(uŌŖż
i us)
P

i exp(uŌŖż
i us)
(11)

v =
X
╬▒ihi
(12)

In the above equation, v is the document vector that summarizes all the in-
formation of sentences in a document. Similarly, the sentence level context vector
us can be randomly initialized and jointly learned during the training process.
The output of the sentence attention layer feeds a fully connected softmax layer.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
5

It gives us a probability distribution over the classes. The proposed method is
openly available in the github repository 1.

3
Experiments and Results

We evaluate the proposed model on two document classi’¼ücation datasets using
90% of the data for training and the remaining 10% for tests. We split docu-
ments into sentences and tokenize each sentence. The word embeddings have
dimension 200 and we use Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. The
datasets used are the IMDb Movie Reviews 2 and Yelp 2018 3. The former con-
tains a set of 25k highly polar movie reviews for training and 25k for testing,
whereas the classi’¼ücation involves detecting positive/negative reviews. The lat-
ter include users ratings and write reviews about stores and services on Yelp,
being a dataset for multiclass classi’¼ücation (ratings from 0-5 stars). Yelp 2018
contains around 5M full review text data, but we ’¼üx in 500k the number of used
samples for computational purposes.

Table 1: Results in classi’¼ücation accuracies.

Method
Accuracy on test set

Yelp 2018 (’¼üve classes)
IMDb (two classes)

VDNN [7]
62.14
79.47
HN-ATT [6]
72.73
89.02
CNN [5]
71.81
91.34
Our model with CNN
73.28
92.26
Our model with TCN
72.63
95.17

Table 1 shows the experiment results comparing our results with related
works. Note that HN-ATT [6] obtained an accuracy of 72,73% in the Yelp test
set, whereas the proposed model obtained an accuracy of 73,28%. Our results
also outperformed CNN [6] and VDNN [7]. We can see an improvement of the
results in Yelp with our approach using CNN and varying window sizes in ’¼ülters.
The model also performs better in the results with IMDb using both CNN and
TCN.

3.1
Attention Weights Visualizations

To validate the model performance in select informative words and sentences, we
present the visualizations of attention weights in Figure 2. There is an example
of the attention visualizations for a positive and negative class in test reviews.
Every line is a sentence. Blue color denotes the sentence weight, and red denotes
the word weight in determining the sentence meaning. There is a greater focus
on more important features despite some exceptions. For example, the word
ŌĆ£lovingŌĆØ and ŌĆ£amazedŌĆØ in Figure 2 (a) and ŌĆ£disappointmentŌĆØ in Figure 2 (b).

1
2 amaas/data/sentiment/
3

6
Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.

(a) A positive example of visualization of a strong word in the sentence.

(b) A negative example of visualization of a strong word in the sentence.

Fig. 2: Visualization of attention weights computed by the proposed model

Occasionally, we have found issues in some sentences, where fewer important
words are getting higher importance. For example, in Figure 2 (a) notes that
the word ŌĆ£translateŌĆØ has received high importance even though it represents a
neutral word. These drawbacks will be taken into account in future works.

4
Final Remarks

In this paper, we have presented the HAHNN architecture for document classi-
’¼ücation. The method combines CNN with attention mechanisms in both word
and sentence level. HAHNN improves accuracy in document classi’¼ücation by
incorporate the document structure in the model and employing CNNŌĆÖs for the
extraction of more abundant features.

References

1. BAHDANAU,
Dzmitry;
CHO,
Kyunghyun;
BENGIO,
Yoshua.
Neural
ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
2. BAI, Shaojie; KOLTER, J. Zico; KOLTUN, Vladlen. An empirical evaluation of
generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01271, 2018.
3. BOJANOWSKI, Piotr et al. Enriching word vectors with subword information.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606, 2016.
4. CHO, Kyunghyun et al. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
5. KIM, Yoon. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classi’¼ücation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5882, 2014.
6. YANG, Zichao et al. Hierarchical attention networks for document classi’¼ücation.
In: Conf. North Am. Chapter of the Assoc. for Comp. Ling. 2016. p.1480-1489, San
Diego, CA, USA.
7. Conneau, Alexis, et al. ŌĆØVery deep convolutional networks for text classi’¼ücation.ŌĆØ
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01781 (2016).