Arindam Paul∗, Dipendra Jha*, Reda Al-Bahrani, Wei-keng Liao, Alok Choudhary and Ankit Agrawal
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University
Email: arindam.paul, dkj755, rav650, wkliao, choudhar,

predictive energy outputs based on the Bureau of Meteorology
and National Aeronautics and Space (NASA) reports [6].
Although inorganic silicon-based solar energy systems are
currently more conventional, organic or plastic photovoltaic
(OPV) [7] technology has become very popular because of
its ﬂexibility. Organic or Plastic Technology is very versatile
as demonstrated by how plastics in consumer goods can be
made very hard and durable, or very light or transparent as
dictated by needs [8]. Further, manufacturing costs are lower
for organic solar cells compared to silicon-based materials due
to the ease of device manufacturing, and lower cost of organic
components compared to silicon [9].
However, the main bottleneck in the deployment of organic
solar cells is that the search for candidate chemical compounds
for creating organic solar cells is very time consuming [10]; it
can take up to thousands of hours of laboratory analysis. For
a solar cell, the most important property is power conversion
efﬁciency (PCE) or the percentage of electricity which can
be generated due to the interaction of electron donors and
acceptors after absorption of energy from the sun. The PCE is
dependent on the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)
energy of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular or-
bital (LUMO) energy of the acceptor molecule [11]. However,
as the LUMO values across known acceptors do not vary
much, and only a few acceptor molecules exist, predicting
HOMO values of donor molecules can give us estimates of
PCE when those donors are used in solar cells.
There are two main issues with the current practice of
building predictive models using machine learning (ML) tech-
niques. First, these predictive models are built using a single
representation of the molecular structure - line notations [12]
such as SMILES or InChI, molecular ﬁngerprints [13] or
molecular graphs [14]. Line notations are increasingly becom-
ing popular for use in ML models as molecular ﬁngerprints
are difﬁcult to interpret and models trained on molecular
graphs usually perform worse [15]. However, these approaches
have restricted themselves to only one type of line notation –
either SMILES or InChI as input representations for predictive
models. This limits the information that can be harnessed
from these representations as SMILES and InChI express the
molecular structure in very different ways. SMILES deﬁnes
the chemical bond types present in the molecular structure
from which one can infer the protonation while InChI serves
the opposite purpose- it deﬁnes the protonation from which
one can infer the chemical bond types present in the molec-

Abstract—Organic Solar Cells are a promising technology for
solving the clean energy crisis in the world. However, generating
candidate chemical compounds for solar cells is a time-consuming
process requiring thousands of hours of laboratory analysis.
For a solar cell, the most important property is the power
conversion efﬁciency which is dependent on the highest occupied
molecular orbitals (HOMO) values of the donor molecules.
Recently, machine learning techniques have proved to be very
useful in building predictive models for HOMO values of donor
structures of Organic Photovoltaic Cells (OPVs). Since exper-
imental datasets are limited in size, current machine learning
models are trained on data derived from calculations based
on density functional theory (DFT). Molecular line notations
such as SMILES or InChI are popular input representations for
describing the molecular structure of donor molecules. The two
types of line representations encode different information, such as
SMILES deﬁnes the bond types while InChi deﬁnes protonation.
In this work, we present an ensemble deep neural network
architecture, called SINet, which harnesses both the SMILES
and InChI molecular representations to predict HOMO values
and leverage the potential of transfer learning from a sizeable
DFT-computed dataset- Harvard CEP to build more robust
predictive models for relatively smaller HOPV datasets. Harvard
CEP dataset contains molecular structures and properties for
2.3 million candidate donor structures for OPV while HOPV
contains DFT-computed and experimental values of 350 and
243 molecules respectively. Our results demonstrate signiﬁcant
performance improvement from the use of transfer learning and
leveraging both molecular representations.

arXiv:1903.03178v4 [cs.LG] 28 Jul 2019

I. INTRODUCTION

Based on current statistics, energy consumption had in-
creased from 238 Exajoules (EJ) in 1972 to 464 EJ in 2004.
A further 65% increase is projected by the year 2030 [1].
Sustained usage of fossil fuels leads to irreversible changes to
the planet with sea level rising from 1.7 to 3.2 mm per year
and ocean temperatures increasing [1], [2]. It is imperative
to search for versatile and cost-efﬁcient clean energy solu-
tions to prevent further irreversible damage. One limitation
with renewable energy is that it is difﬁcult to generate the
quantities of electricity that are as large as those produced by
traditional fossil-fuel generators [3]. Wind and hydro-energy
solutions require expensive installations [4] and maintenance,
which requires large government grants, and are dependent on
weather and climate conditions [5]. Moreover, most renewable
energy technology is new and has enormous capital costs
compared to traditional fossil fuels. Solar energy provides a
more cost-effective solution with faster installation, and more

*equal contribution

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS

In this section, we present a description of the OPV tech-
nology and Scharber model, and the two molecular represen-
tations we use in this work – SMILES and InChI, and discuss
existing machine learning systems for predictive modeling for
materials.

A. Organic Photovoltaic Cells

Among current solar cell design paradigms, organic pho-
tovoltaic cell technology is a promising technology for the
inexpensive and versatile utilization of solar energy. The
traditional development of new OPV materials is predomi-
nantly based on empirical intuition or experience of materials
scientists. A new design idea is followed by a labor-intensive
synthesis, characterization, and prototype device optimiza-
tion. Hence, the problem space of OPV renewable energy
research is notably complicated as the design of successful
OPV materials is a multifaceted problem. The conversion of
sunlight into electricity can be achieved using a solar cell
and is one of the most attractive future sources of energy.
Ever since the development of the ﬁrst solar cells, there has
been an accelerated and comprehensive exploration for cost-
effective photovoltaics. OPVs are potential cost-effective and
lightweight alternatives to silicon-based solar cells and could
lead to the most substantial reduction of production cost.
After being excited with light, ﬁrmly bound electron-hole pairs
(excitons) are generated. As illustrated in Figure 1, an OPV
works by absorbing a photon emitted by the sun. The photon
carries energy that is used to excite an electron off a donor
layer, often comprised of a semiconducting polymer.
However, for the solar cell to generate electricity, the
electron and hole must be separated and subsequently collected
at electrodes of opposite polarity. In order to accomplish
this, the exciton bond must be broken. This happens at the
donor-acceptor interface, where the exciton splits into separate
free electron and hole. As the charges separate further, they
can reach electrodes which upon becoming charged, generate
electricity as the electrons move from the cathode to the anode.
OPVs have the advantage of combining the versatility and
ﬂexibility of plastics with photo-electronics. They can be
made semi-transparent, and moldable into different forms and
shapes. Researchers have even tried spray-coating OPVs on
various surfaces [21]. Nonetheless, production scale small-area
devices yield efﬁciency of only about 5% [22], with laboratory
experiments yielding the highest efﬁciency of around 10%, and
hence there is much room for improvement. Several models
predict the efﬁciencies to reach 15% assuming the usage
of state of the art materials and device architectures [23].
The conventional process for the generation of such devices
is iterative and time-consuming. However, due to the labor-
intensive process of generating candidates for OPVs, produc-
ing virtual screening techniques as elucidated by Pyzer-Knapp

D. InChI

The IUPAC International Chemical Identiﬁer (InChI) [26]
was developed by IUPAC and NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology). It is a textual identiﬁer for chem-
ical substances which provides a standard way to encode
molecular information. Every InChI string starts with the string
“InChI=” followed by the version number and letter S in
the case of standardized InChIs. Rest of the InChI string is
structured as a sequence of layers and sub-layers. Each layer
provides a speciﬁc type of information, and are separated by
“/”. The InChI algorithm transforms the structural information
of the molecule into a unique InChI identiﬁer in a three-
step process. The ﬁrst step is normalization which removes
redundant information. This is followed by canonicalization
that generates a unique number label for each atom. The last
step is serialization that produces a string of characters.
SMILES and InChI are distinct notations. SMILES deﬁnes
the bond types from which one can infer protonation, while
InChI deﬁnes protonation from which one can infer the bond
types. SMILES was designed to be read and written by humans
and is therefore relatively straightforward to read, provided
the user knows a few basic principles of the format. InChI, is
comparatively less readable, is intended to ignore tautomeric
form and is consistent. Table I illustrates the distinction
between SMILES and InChI representations.

Fig. 1.
Photo-electricity generation in a bulk heterojunction Organic pho-
tovoltaic cell [20]. When the photons from the sun hit the surface of the
OPV device, an electron from the donor is excited and combines with the
corresponding hole at the acceptor layer to form an exciton. Electricity is
generated when the exciton splits at the interface, and electrons move from
the cathode to the anode.

et al. [13] and our current study can potentially fasten the
process considerably.

B. Scharber Model
For a solar cell, the most important property is power
conversion efﬁciency or the amount of electricity which can
be generated due to the interaction of electron donors and ac-
ceptors. The Scharber model [11] provides a relation between
the voltage Voc and the energies of the HOMO and the LUMO
level of the donor and acceptor molecules, which in turn
can be related to the power conversion efﬁciency (PCE), the
maximum efﬁciency of solar cells. In the following equation,
Jsc is the short-circuit current density, FF is electrical ﬁll
factor and Pin is incident-light intensity. EDonorHOMO and
EAcceptorLUMO indicate the HOMO and LUMO energy
levels of the donor and acceptor molecules respectively.

Voc = (1/e)(EDonorHOMO −EAcceptorLUMO) −0.3V

E. Related Works

PCE = 100 ∗(Voc ∗FF ∗Jsc)/Pin

There have been many efforts in the ﬁeld of ML-assisted
materials prediction and discovery [13], [14], [27]–[35]. For
instance, Sajeev et al. [36] developed a virtual library of
semi-conductors and non semi-conductors of small organic
compounds and applied various ML classiﬁers to predict the
conductivity of a given compound. They used block descrip-
tors as attributes which were generated based on E-Dragon
Software [37]. Riede et al. [38] used principal component
analysis on a small data set of 62 organic solar cells which
consisted of manufacturing parameters and measurement re-
sults on seven different substrates. Olivares-Amaya et al.
[39] employed Marvin code by ChemAxon [40] on a set

However, it is necessary to assert that the predictions from
the Scharber analysis are restrained by various assumptions
and the quality of the input data. The assumptions include re-
quirements related to complicated bulk and interface behavior,
and exciton and charge carrier dynamics. Hence, the resultant
values should be understood as the potential performance that
can be achieved if the assumptions are met.

C. SMILES
Line notations are linear representations of chemical struc-
tures which encode the connection table and the stereo-
chemistry of a molecule as a line of text
[12]. Simpliﬁed

Compound 1
Compound 2
Line Notations (with explanation)

• SMILES: CCO and COC
• InChI: InChI=1S/C2H6O/c1-2-3/h3H,2H2,1H3 and InChI=1S/C2H6O/c1-3-2/h1-
2H3
• “C2H6O” means that the ﬁrst and second atoms (1 and 2) are C atoms and the
third (3) is an O atom. The connectivity is 1-2-3 for ethanol and 1-3-2 for dimethyl
ether. For ethanol atom 3 has 1 H atom, atom 2 has 2 H atoms, and atom 1 has
3 H atoms. For dimethyl ether atom 1-2 have 3 H atoms, while atom 3 has none.

Ethanol
Dimethyl Ether

• SMILES: CCN and CC[NH3+]
• InChI=1S/C2H7N/c1-2-3/h2-3H2,1H3
and
InChI=1S/C2H7N/c1-2-3/h2-
3H2,1H3/p+1
• For the InChI notation, the protonation (h2-3H2,1H3) is identical in both cases
an corresponds to ethylamine. For ethylammonium ”p+1” indicates that an extra
proton is added.

Ethylamine
Ethylammonium

• SMILES: c1ccccc1 and Cc1ccccc1

• InChI=1S/C6H6/c1-2-4-6-5-3-1/h1-6H and InChI=1S/C7H8/c1-7-5-3-2-4-6-7/h2-
6H,1H3
• For the SMILES notation, in the case of benzene atom 1 is connected to both
atom 2 and atom 6, i.e. a ring is formed. ”1” is a label and does not refer
to atom number 1 (see toluene). A lower case ”c” is used to indicate aromatic
carbons, meaning they should be singly protonated. For toluene, the methyl group
is bonded to atom number 2, which is also bonded to atom number 7. For the
InChI notation, in the case of benzene aromaticity is inferred from the fact that
all 6 carbon has 1 H atom (h1-6H). For toluene, the methyl group is bonded to
atom number 7, which is also bonded to atom number 6.

Benzene
Toluene

SMILES grammar and rather allowed the RNN units to under-
stand the intermediate features useful for property prediction
implicitly. Their work also demonstrated that networks trained
on line notations can perform better than other representations
such as molecular graphs. Paul et al. [35] used a combina-
tion of ﬁngerprints and SMILES to develop a deep neural
network architecture called CheMixNet, and it outperformed
SMILES2vec trained only on SMILES strings on the same
datasets.

of 50 training molecules compiled from the literature which
provides a set of over 200 descriptors relevant for applications
based on organic materials. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi et al. [28]
used kernel ridge regression (KRR) to transform the input
ﬁngerprint of a chemical compound into higher dimensional
space to establish a linear relationship between the transformed
ﬁngerprint and the property of interest. They addressed the
issue of accelerating polymer dielectrics design by extracting
learning models from data generated by accurate state-of-
the-art ﬁrst-principles computations for polymers occupying
a vital part of the chemical subspace. In their 2013 work,
Kanal et al. [20] focused on a screening pipeline which used
a genetic algorithm for initial screening and multiple ﬁltering
stages for further reﬁnement of the HOMO and LUMO
properties of acceptors and donors. In the Harvard Energy
Clean Project, Pyzer-Knapp et al. [13] used a multi-layered
perceptron (MLP) for predicting power conversion efﬁciency
of organic photovoltaic materials from a sizable database of
DFT-derived properties.

III. METHOD

In this section, we present the source and target organic
photovoltaic datasets used in our experiments, discuss the
preprocessing of the SMILES and InChI strings and propound
our methodology.

A. Datasets

The source dataset for transfer learning is the Harvard
CEP Dataset [13], [16] which contains molecular structures
and properties for 2.3 million candidate donor structures for
organic photovoltaic cells. For a solar cell, the most important
property is power conversion efﬁciency or the amount of
electricity which can be generated due to the interaction of
electron donors and acceptors, which are dependent on the
HOMO values of the donor molecules. In this work, we
considered the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO)
as the target property as it determines the power conversion
efﬁciency of a solar cell according to the Scharber model [11].
The target dataset was the Harvard Organic Photovoltaic
(HOPV) dataset [19] which is a collection of photovoltaic

Molecular graph convolutions [14] is an ML architec-
ture for learning from undirected graphs, speciﬁcally from
small molecules, and have become popular representations
for molecular structures. It uses a simple encoding of the
molecular graphatoms, bonds, the distance between atoms that
allow the model to take more advantage of information in
the graph structure. More recently, Goh et al. [34] developed
an RNN neural network architecture SMILES2vec trained on
SMILES for predicting chemical properties across different
datasets. They did not explicitly encode information about

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present the experimental settings and
results of the ensemble SINet architecture including the impact
of transfer learning for performance gain on the smaller HOPV
datasets.

B. Preprocessing

For both the SMILES and InChI sequences, one-hot en-
coding was performed separately to convert them into ﬁxed
length representations. The sequence lengths were calculated
using the length of the longest SMILES and InChI sequences
in the dataset respectively. To maintain a uniform sequence
size, shorter strings were padded with zeros. Similar to
SMILES2vec, vocabulary size was equal to the number of
unique characters. The sequence lengths are 82 and 162
respectively for SMILES and InChI input representations.

A. Experimental Settings
The models were implemented using Python and Keras [44]
with TensorFlow [45] as the backend. We used Adam as
the optimization algorithm with a mini-batch size of 32. For
generating the InChI ﬁngerprints for the CEP dataset, we used
RDKIT [46] library to generate InChI from the molecules.
Scikit-Learn [47] was used for data preprocessing and for
evaluating the test set errors. All experiments are carried out
using NVIDIA DIGITS DevBox with a Core i7-5930K 6 Core
3.5GHz desktop processor, 64GB DDR4 RAM, and 4 TITAN
X GPUs with 12GB of memory per GPU. We performed
extensive hyperparameter search as well as architecture search
for SINet. For our experiments, we used a learning rate
of 0.001. We used the mean squared error (MSE) as the
loss function and used the mean absolute % error (MAPE)
as the performance metric. Early stopping was used during
training to avoid over-ﬁtting. For our experiments, we split
each dataset into 70-20-10 ratio for training, test and validation
sets; we used the same split for all experiments of each dataset.
Stratiﬁed shufﬂing was used to ensure that the distribution of
HOMO values for all the 3 subsets was similar.

C. SINet

Figure 2 illustrates the proposed approach for performing
transfer learning from the Harvard CEP dataset to the two
smaller target datasets in the HOPV dataset. The deep neural
network architecture used for the task consists of two branches
for the two types of the input representations of SMILES
and InChI. The SMILES input vector has a length of 82
while the InChI input has 162 values. Both branches have
the same network conﬁguration. Each branch is composed of
a 1-D CNN followed by an LSTM network. The 1-D CNN
is composed of two layers with 32 ﬁlters each; the ﬁlter size
used in each layer is 3 and same padding for the inputs and
output. The convolutional layers are followed by max pooling
with a pool size of 2. There was no signiﬁcant difference with
other types of pooling and other pooling sizes. The output
of the 1-D CNN is fed into the LSTM network which is
composed of 2 layers having 64 units each. Finally, the outputs
from both branches are concatenated into the merge layer and
fed into a fully connected network which is composed of
a penultimate dense layer with 64 units and the ﬁnal layer
that gives the HOMO value as the regression output. Since
the network architecture leverages both SMILES and InChI
molecular representations, we refer to it as SINet.
For transfer learning, ﬁrst, we train a model on the source
dataset of Harvard CEP from scratch (by initializing the model
parameters from scratch before training). While being trained
on the large dataset, the model learns a rich set of feature
representations present in the large training data which is
useful for making predictions in the source domain. Next,

B. Impact of Leveraging SMILES & InChi
First, we explored the performance of using different types
of input representations and their combinations on the source
and the target datasets. On the source dataset of Harvard CEP,
we observe that the MAPE decreased to 0.213% while using
the SINet model as shown in Figure 3. In contrast, while
using the individual input representations with the individual
branch of SINet, the MAPE values were 0.972% and 0.457%
using SMILES and InChi. This was also true for the tar-
get datasets of experimental and DFT-computed values from
HOPV. We conjecture the prediction mainly improves while
leveraging multiple molecular representations because the two
line notations- SMILES and InChI differ in the representation
and detail; hence, the model can learn different feature repre-
sentation from the two input representation, leading to better
performance.

InChI

SMILES

SMILES

InChI

Cc1ccc(-c2c3ccsc3c(-

InChI=1S/C36H24N2O2S6/c1-17-7-9-22(43-17)27-

InChI=1S/C24H18N2Si2/c1-3-15-16(4-
1)22-21-18-12-27-11-13(18)6-7-19(21)26-

C1C=c2c3c([nH]c4ccc5=C[SiH

19-13-15-42-33(19)28(23-10-8-18(2)44-23)20-16-

c3ccc(C)s3)c3cc(-
c4ccc(C5=C6C(=O)N(C)C(c7cccs7)

2]C=c5c34)c3ncc(cc3c2=C1)

26(46-34(20)27)21-11-12-25(45-21)32-30-
29(35(39)38(32)4)31(37(3)36(30)40)24-6-5-14-41-

24(22)23-17(15)9-14(10-25-23)20-5-2-8-

C1=CC=C[SiH2]1

28-20/h2-12,26H,1,27-28H2

=C6C(=O)N5C)s4)sc32)s1

24/h5-16H,1-4H3

2 layers
2 layers

2 layers
2 layers

2 layers
2 layers

2 layers
2 layers

1-D CNN

1-D CNN

1-D CNN

1-D CNN

Transfer

Learned
Knowledge

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

Merge Layer

Merge Layer

Fully Connected MLP

Fully Connected MLP

Source Dataset

Target Dataset

Fig. 2. The proposed SINet architecture for learning from the two text-based molecular representations - SMILES and InChI. The left side (represented by
faded colors) represents the learning from the source dataset while the right side (represented by darker colors) represents the learning for the target dataset.
For both the learning systems, the red branch represents the network for sequence modeling from SMILES while the blue branch represents the network for
sequence modeling from InChI. The purple part represents the fully connected layers that learn the ﬁnal output from the combination of features learned by
the two network branches. We exemplify the SMILES and InChI with one representative example in this illustration from both the source as well as target
datasets.

6

without TL
with TL

1.0

5

0.8

% Mean Absolute Error

% Mean Absolute Error

4

0.6

3

0.4

2

0.2

1

SMILES+InChI
InChI
SMILES
SINet
0.0

SMILES+InChI
InChI
SMILES
SINet
0

Fig. 3. Mean Absolute Error Percentage for the CEP Dataset (source dataset)

Fig. 4. Mean Absolute Error Percentage for the OPV Experimental Dataset
without and with Transfer Learning (TL)

Furthermore, we experimented with simply combining the
two input representations- SMILES and InChI into a single
input vector (represented as SMILES + InChI in Figure 3),
before feeding them into a branch of SINet, the MAPE,
in this case, was 0.430% which is lower than while using
single input. However, there was no beneﬁt from simply

combining the two input representations into a single vector
in the case of experimental target dataset. We surmise that
this could be because the two line notations encode different
representations with varying lengths for different compounds,
and a concatenation of the representations was not sufﬁcient

5

% Mean Absolute Error

4

3

2

1

SMILES+InChI
InChI
SMILES
SINet
0

Fig. 5. Mean Absolute Error Percentage for the OPV DFT Dataset without
and with Transfer Learning (TL)

for learning both notations. Our results recommend that a
better way to incorporate multiple input representations such
as SMILES and InChI, in this case, is to design the deep neural
network to have different model components to handle each
of them before the learned features can be combined to make
the ﬁnal output as in the case of SINet.
In addition, we can observe the impact of training data size
on the prediction performance; the prediction error of SINet on
Harvard CEP dataset is signiﬁcantly lower than the prediction
error of SINet on the two other relatively smaller datasets. This
also justiﬁes the use of large dataset as the source dataset while
using transfer learning to a smaller target dataset.

C. Impact of Transfer Learning

We also investigated the impact of transfer learning from
the DFT-computed dataset of Harvard CEP to the relatively
smaller DFT-computed and experimental datasets from HOPV.
For the experimental data having only 243 samples, the MAPE
in case of SINet decreased signiﬁcantly from 2.782% to
1.513% which is around half. We observed similar changes
when using just one input or their simple combination as
shown in Figure 4. For the target dataset of DFT-computed
dataset with 344 samples, the error for SINet decreased from
2.118% to 1.478% (in Figure 5). Such a signiﬁcant drop in
the MAPE for both our target datasets illustrates the efﬁcacy
of using transfer learning from large datasets when doing
predictive modeling on smaller datasets with a lesser number
of samples. The experiments exhibit that when a model is
trained on a large dataset (model parameters being initialized
from a model trained on large source dataset), it already
captures the required features from the dataset which makes it
easy to learn the features present in target data from a similar
domain on which it is ﬁne-tuned.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported in part by the following grants:
NIST award 70NANB14H012, NSF award CCF-1409601;
DOE awards de-sc0014330, de-sc0019358.

REFERENCES

[1] T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen,
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley, “Climate
change 2013: The physical science basis,” 2014.
[2] A. Hoffman, “Computational chemistry in rational material design for
organic photovoltaics,” 2015.
[3] G. Boyle et al., Renewable energy: power for a sustainable future.
Taylor & Francis, 1997.
[4] J. A. Turner, “A realizable renewable energy future,” Science, vol. 285,
no. 5428, pp. 687–689, 1999.
[5] L. Baxter, “Biomass-coal co-combustion: opportunity for affordable
renewable energy,” Fuel, vol. 84, no. 10, pp. 1295–1302, 2005.
[6] NASA, “Nasa - clean energy,”
greenspace/clean-energy.html, 2016.
[7] J. Yu, Y. Zheng, and J. Huang, “Towards high performance organic pho-
tovoltaic cells: A review of recent development in organic photovoltaics,”
Polymers, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 2473–2509, 2014.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

In this paper, we presented a novel approach of predictive
modeling for HOMO values of donor molecules for the