Antti Knutas
LUT University
School of Engineering Sciences
Lappeenranta, Finland

Victoria Palacin
LUT University
School of Engineering Sciences
Lappeenranta, Finland

Giovanni Maccani
Maynooth University
School of Business
Maynooth, Ireland

Markus Helfert
Dublin City University
School of Computing
Dublin, Ireland

Abstract—Civic grassroots have proven their ability to create
useful and scalable software that addresses pressing social
needs. Although software engineering plays a fundamental
role in the process of creating civic technology, academic
literature that analyses the software development processes
of civic tech grassroots is scarce. This paper aims to advance
the understanding of how civic grassroots tackle the different
activities in their software development processes. In this study,
we followed the formation of two projects in a civic tech group
(Code for Ireland) seeking to understand how their development
processes evolved over time, and how the group carried out their
work in creating new technology. Our preliminary ﬁndings show
that such groups are capable of setting up systematic software
engineering
processes
that
address
software
speciﬁcation,
development, validation, and evolution. While they were able to
deliver software according to self-speciﬁed quality standards, the
group has challenges in requirements speciﬁcation, stakeholder
engagement, and reorienting from development to product
delivery. Software engineering methods and tools can effectively
support the future of civic technologies and potentially improve
their management, quality, and durability.
Index Terms—civic grassroots; civic tech; software engineering;
development processes; case study

arXiv:1904.04104v1 [cs.SE] 8 Apr 2019

Figure 1. Palette of Public Participation in Civic Technology adapted from [4]

[7, 8], research in the context of software engineering practices
in civic technologies remains under-explored [9, 10].
In order to better understand how grassroots organizations
develop civic tech, we performed an in-depth qualitative study
of a civic tech group: Code for Ireland. In the study, we
followed the formation of two projects in Code for Ireland,
seeking to understand how their development processes
evolved over time, and how the group carried out their work in
creating new technology. We want to understand if a systematic
process similar to a software engineering process emerges,
and what kind of process the group adopts. From existing
studies on open source software projects [11], we know
that volunteer-based communities can set up processes with
characteristics of software engineering processes, including
the systematic use of theories, methods, and tools to achieve
desired levels of quality, acceptability, and maintainability [12].
To accomplish our goals, we framed our research as
an interpretive case study [13, 14] using the constructive
grounded theory research method [15]2. Our main contribution
is providing a situated, systematic explanation of one civic
technology software engineering process phenomenon.
To address this gap in knowledge, we have formulated the fol-
lowing exploratory research question for our study: What soft-

I. INTRODUCTION

Technology has facilitated the evolution of public participa-
tion. It has enhanced the rise of civic grass rooted actions such
as activism, mobilizations, public campaigning and community
monitoring due to its power to connect people, improve cities
and to better governance [1]. It must be understood that every
interaction between people and a civic technology1 represents a
deliberate and intentional act of public participation, which can
take different forms (see Fig. 1), from merely allowing people to
consume information about matters they care about e.g. trafﬁc
or pollution (data consumer); collect data about predeﬁned
issues of common interest e.g. FixMyStreet (data provider);
collaborate with authorities to monitor issues - predeﬁned by
authorities - (collaborators); co-create solutions for issues of
shared concern (co-creator); ideate civic action e.g. Code for
Ireland (ideator); or, disrupt established processes by passive
non-participation or negative participation (disruptor) [4].
Civic technology is currently an intense target of study
[5]. While extant literature seeks to understand the effect of
technology on people [3, 6] and to orchestrate civic engagement

2In this context theory is deﬁned as a set of testable abstract statements
that deﬁne and explain relationships among constructs, as set of prescriptive
instructions on how something should be done, and as a set of abstract
statements providing a lens for viewing or explaining a part of a phenomenon
[16]. A situational theory emerging from the research process is not necessarily
a ”grand theory” explaining the entire phenomenon [17].

1Civic technology refers to the diverse ways in which people are using
technology to inﬂuence change in society [1, 2, 3].

III. RESEARCH SETUP
The purpose of this research project is to investigate the
software creation processes in grassroots-driven groups who
create civic technology, about which our literature review
informs a substantial lack of theoretical insights speciﬁcally
related to this recent academic conversation. We assume that
grassroots civic software creation contexts happen through an
apparently natural process, but a complex one, and contingent
on several social actors and activities. Therefore, we consider
an interpretive perspective the most suitable for this project.
Given the nature of this study, we found a qualitative
approach to data collection and analysis appropriate. Given that
these software creation processes are explored from the mean-
ing given by the people that are actively involved in constructing
such reality, qualitative research methods are appropriate as
they are “designed to help researchers understand people and
the social and cultural contexts within which they live” [34].
Case study research was found to be the most suitable for
the purposes of this research. It is a qualitative approach in
which the investigator explores a bounded system (a case in
a speciﬁc setting/context) over time, through detailed, in-depth
data collection involving multiple sources of information, and
reports a case description and case-based themes [13, 35, 36].

II. RELATED RESEARCH ON CIVIC TECHNOLOGY

Since 2014, the term civic technology, also known as
”civic tech”, started to increasingly appear in discussions
about public participation and governance, rapidly surpassing
terms like e-governance, e-democracy, gov2.0 or gov.3.0 [2].
Civic tech is a term that refers to the diverse ways in which
people are using technology to inﬂuence change in society
[1]. The breadth of civic technologies is wide and comprises
a large pool of technologies for i) governance (e.g. MySociety,
SeeClickFix), ii) collaborative consumption (e.g. Airbnb,
TaskRabbit), iii) community action (e.g. citizen investor,
GeekCorps), iv) civic media (e.g. Wikipedia, Global Voices)
and v) community organizing (e.g. Whatsapp groups) [1].
Researchers across many ﬁelds of software engineering have
been studying civic technologies from different perspectives,
for instance: a) examining the role of information technologies
in governance [18]; b) supporting participatory democracy
practices of technology in society [19]; c) understanding the
role of software in society [20]; d) exploring the dynamics
of the collaborative use of software [21], e) developing agile
methods and techniques to support software development in
society [22, 9] and, more recently f) architecting smart cities,
open data with and for people [23]. In other related ﬁelds, such
as HCI, the focus has turned onto examining the a) dynamics
of technology in public life, b) civic discourse on social
media, c) civic engagement, d) data literacy, e) social justice
and f) trust, often using in-the-wild approaches of systems
in communities [3, 6]. In addition, both SE [24, 25, 26] and
human-computer interaction (HCI) [27, 28, 29] share a recent
turn of interest onto sustainability matters, which has a close
link with civic tech, as the focus is put on the environment,
peoples’ behavior and the role of technology [3].
People have inﬂuenced the development of cities around
the world by orchestrating grassroots initiatives through which
they take action and solve issues they care about. These
groups have affected positive change in neighborhoods as
well as at a larger scale. For instance, Safecast3 was created
by a group of people that wanted accurate and real-time
measures of radiation. They created open hardware devices
to allow people to measure radiation on the go. By now,
Safecast has become the go-to solution for radiation measures
worldwide (all supported by a large pool of volunteers across
the globe). Civic technology groups have a rich variety of
goals, from city-driven projects [30], issue-centric initiatives
[8] to user-driven groups, such as hackerspaces and fablabs

A. Case: Code for Ireland
The case we studied is concentrated on a grassroots group
creating civic tech, Code for Ireland, which describes its
mission as ”developing innovative and sustainable solutions
to real-world problems faced by communities across Ireland,
by fostering collaboration with civic-minded individuals,
businesses and public sector organizations.” The group is
led by volunteers, coordinated online through services such as
Meetup.com, and not ofﬁcially registered. We coined a term
”organically grown civic tech” to describe the group because
the current iteration of Code for Ireland was formed by a group
of motivated citizens coming together. They have not registered
as a formal organization, they operate without the intention
of making a proﬁt, and use only volunteered or donated
resources. Furthermore, there is no city organization, academic
body, or other inﬂuential stakeholders backing the group. If
evaluated with the palette of public participation (Fig. 1), they
are ideators or people who are taking civic actions in their
hands and orchestrating the creation of civic tech.
Code for Ireland was selected as the case study for this
research for several reasons, including: (1) the case is a clear
example of grassroots civic software development (i.e. the
phenomenon of interest); (2) since the very ﬁrst contact with
the case, a signiﬁcant interest was observed from the group
members to take part of this study, which ensured us the
possibility of conducting interviews; (3) their willingness
to share experiences, and access to relevant documents and
material; (4) the group and its people are based in a location that
allowed us long-term engagement and to conduct observations;
and (5) unlike similar groups, Code for Ireland has been

3

Figure 2. Case study context

Table I
CODE FOR IRELAND PROJECTS INCLUDED IN THE STUDY

IV. CASE ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
In this section, we present our data analysis process and
summarize results from each stage of analysis. We analyzed the
data using the grounded theory research method [40, 17, 15],
following the existing empirical software engineering literature
in adapting it for case study analysis [36] and used e.g. by
Kasurinen et al. [41]. Grounded theory has been useful in
developing context-based, process-oriented descriptions and
explanations of phenomena [17].
There are variations on how to approach grounded theory
research, as evidenced by a split between Strauss and Glaser
in their research methodology publications. In this paper,
we follow Charmaz’s [15] constructivist grounded theory,
which acknowledges that when interacting and interviewing,
knowledge is built together with the participants and the
researcher. This approach was chosen because the researcher
spent an extended period interacting with the researched
civic tech group. We also used Charmaz’s guidelines for
ethnographic research for analyzing the data from research
participation in Code for Ireland activities and the approach
by Vaast et al. [42] when analyzing publicly available social
media and online software repository data.
The grounded theory approach [15] we selected has three
stages, with each stage leading towards the increasing depth
of analysis and generalization. The three stages [17] are
summarized in Table II and their results are expanded on in
the following subsections.

Project
Partic-
ipants
Stage
Description

Transparent
Water
4 core
team; 1
mentor;
1-2
others

The project aims to open
up water quality data from
Irish Water with an app. Main
features include geolocation-
based data summaries
and service notiﬁcations.

Achieved
minimum vi-
able product;
preparing
for a
beta release.

Fluc-
tuating;
2-3
(core
team);
1
mentor

Undergoing
a restart after
a switch of
development
team.

Collecting information
on vacant homes through a
mobile app and then providing
summaries of this data to the
ofﬁcial vacant home project.

Identifying
Vacant
Homes

operating for more than 5 years, and thus ensured maturity
in relation to the richness of the participants’ experiences.
The structure of the case study is described in Fig. 2, which
is similar to a single case study with multiple embedded units
of analysis [36]. In the ﬁgure, we specify three essential units:
(1) The group, which is all of Code for Ireland. (2) Teams,
who work on (3) projects. The group can have several ongoing
projects, with each team working on one or several projects
simultaneously. In this case, we studied a single organization
and the two projects the group was working on. These are
Transparent Water, which is concentrated on making water
quality data available; and Vacant Homes, which focuses on
developing a mobile app to identify apartments that could be
rented to alleviate the current housing crisis in Dublin. The
projects are expanded on in Table I.

A. Open Coding: Identifying Actors, Concepts and Categories
We started the open coding phase by coding the interviews
line by line using the Dedoose Computer Assisted Qualitative
Data Analysis Software. The start of our coding process
was informed by the process coding family [40], which was
selected as it best matched our research questions. With this
open coding process we identiﬁed initial concepts present in
the interviews and online material and deﬁned 372 codes to
describe them. During subsequent iterations these codes were
grouped into eleven top categories, which are pre-process5,

B. Data Collection

Inductive qualitative case study researchers usually combine
multiple data collection methods [13, 37, 38, 39] and keep
the design of the process ﬂexible to “provide stronger
substantiation of constructs” [37, pp. 538]. While observation
was a natural source for collecting data during the time we
spent on site, documents and semi-structured interviews were
chosen as the other main sources for the data collection process.

4Interview guide available at
5When we discuss a concept identiﬁed through the coding process, the
word is italicized.

Open
coding (de-
scription)

Describing conceptual
constructs involved in the phenomenon and their properties.

Selective
coding
(inter-
pretation)

Deﬁning and explaining the interactions between
the conceptual constructs. Reﬁning and generalizing.
Understanding and explaining the area under investigation.

Theoreti-
cal coding
(for-
mulating
a theory)

Formulation of a descriptive theory. Aim is to create
inferential and/or predictive statements about the phenomena.
Achieved by deﬁning relationships between individual
interpretive constructs. E.g. associations, inﬂuences or causal.

team formation & selling the idea, group goals / decisions,
personal motivations, challenges, problem / opportunity,
requirements deﬁnition, task division & decisionmaking, design
& engineering activities, evaluation, and post-process.
When analyzing the interview data, we identiﬁed four
main type of participants: Mentor, core group, a regular
contributor, and visitors. Mentor spars with the group without
directly inﬂuencing the decision-making process. The core
group emerges from regular contributors by their activity and
commitment, and has the most inﬂuence, mainly because they
are the major contributors. If a project manager is selected,
the project manager is ﬁrst among equals, others willingly
following the project manager’s lead. Most interviewed core
group members and contributors had a software technology
career background, and all were from technical ﬁelds, such as
statistics and project management. None of the participants had
previously participated in the open source software community,
though some had worked with open data initiatives.

Figure 3. Overall project progress structure in Code for Ireland

Furthermore, the project can change shape and direction
rapidly if necessary and so desired by the team.
Monthly meetups
are the main structured social event
around which new teams and projects form. The meet-ups
allow evaluating new ideas and getting input in the form of
new members, ideas, and priorities. Motivation and the selling
the idea are big part of the initial meet-up. The mentor leads
the ﬁrst meet-up and presents projects to newcomers. The orga-
nization, Code for Ireland in this case, often has some ongoing
projects or new ones waiting for implementation. The mentor
tries to make sure that individual goals match with the available
projects and then facilitates the newly formed team’s decision-
making process until they create their own internal structure.

“I would say they deﬁnitely start mostly with the
meet-up. They would come to a meet-up, get to know
us during the meet-up and say, ‘Okay, I’m happy
I’m interested in working a lot, continue working
on it.’ In some free time I’ll have just– I don’t know
if I have a lot of free time but I’ll see how much
I can do and then go from there.” —Interviewee D5
The ﬁrst monthly meetup results in initial consensus on
group goals, which is based on negotiation between team
members and their motivations. Weekly meetups are the
second major event around which the teams are structured.
The meetups and project structure are loosely inspired by
agile methodology. The team members negotiate between task
assignment before dispersing to perform individual work.

“[...] but also when people were committed, they
were motivated that they were part of something
like task or group that like solving real challenging
problems.” —Interviewee D4
During the last iteration of open coding, we selected the
civic tech software creation process as our core category,
which is the central phenomenon around which all the other
categories are related [43]. In the next part, selective coding,
we relate other discovered code categories to the core category.

B. Selective Coding: Identifying the Civic Tech Software
Development Process

“It’s an agile approach and – if the team consensus
says to go down a different direction, that’s the
direction it goes down.” —Interviewee D3
Weekly online stand-up meetings
and individual work
balance the team decision-making process and getting things
done, and establish the basic loop of work. The teams meet
weekly or less often (but more often than the monthly personal
meeting) to design and evaluate. After the weekly meeting,
members disperse into smaller units, like pairs or individuals,
and work to accomplish the agreed on goals. The loop
between shared design and individual work and the outputs
of each stage are depicted in Fig. 4.

In this section, we reﬁne the data by taking the discovered
codes, further categorizing them into hypernyms with the help
of the process coding family and then establishing causal or
semantic relationships [44] between the concepts. We started
selective coding by identifying the iterative process of the
group’s project structure and abstracting it. It is presented in
Fig. 3 and consists of monthly meetups, which lead to new
team composition, who meet weekly to design or to evaluate
outputs. They are guided by a mentor in this process, until the
new team selects a project manager or a core group emerges.
In one sense the process is iterative, but we have chosen to
depict it as a spiral because some stages are not repeated.

Figure 4. The teams’ iterative plan-consensus-action-evaluation loop

“–We do like a week-by-week. We have a weekly
review call where we talk about, ’Okay, this is where
we’re currently at, this is how much, what everyone’s
done.’ Everyone does a stand up in a way and so
what they’ve accomplished in the last week or 10
days and then we go from there, ’Okay, see, this is
what we need to go forward, this is our current status
it might depend on hosting, what technologies do we
still need, what could be added, what functionality,
where do we go from there?’ ” —Interviewee D5

“I wouldn’t call it sprints, I would say we work
quite agile. I wouldn’t call it sprints but we do kind
of do like a week-by-week.” —Interviewee D5
The group works with the intention of being part of a larger
ecosystem of other, related groups, and sharing source code
and adapting the shared solutions of other groups to local
contexts. However, generalizing the solutions has proven to
be challenging, considering the localized nature of problems
they are addressing. They still participate in the network in
the sense that they use open source -licensed software, openly
publish their software artifacts, and publicize information about
their solutions to other groups within the ”Code for” network.

One major characteristic of this loop is opportunistic design
and opportunistic evaluation. The goals are not only evaluated
based on what needs to be done based on requirements but what
can be done. This is because the group is dependent on volun-
teers and voluntarily contributed resources, such as server space
or meeting locations. For example, if a team gains a member
with competence in a new beneﬁcial technology, the use of that
technology might be re-negotiated into team goals. The team
also recognizes that some features might not meet original goals,
but might decide to work towards a minimum viable product
despite the challenges and work on recruiting in the meanwhile.
Technological tools
play a major role in facilitating
team functionality. Communication channels such as Slack
and WhatsApp and commit access to deﬁne team membership
in one sense. If a team member is part of all shared online
systems that enable them to contribute, that essentially signiﬁes
team membership. Furthermore, they store and communicate all
group artifacts, and in some cases act semi-independently after
programming and exert inﬂuence over the process. For example,
software artifact production is facilitated through GitHub, which
is a platform for storing and managing software source code.
The platform facilitates source code peer review and can also
perform automated quality control operations after each new
commit. In one of the projects, the core group has decided on
automatic style guide checking through linter software and that
each new commit has to be peer reviewed in a code review pro-
cess in GitHub. Technically anyone can contribute new source
code, even a complete newcomer. However, the contribution has
to 1) match existing group goals, 2) pass automatic evaluation
against pre-existing unit tests and the automated style guide,
and 3) pass a peer review by more experienced contributors.

C. Theoretical Coding: Abstracting the Development Process
and Deﬁning the Associations

In this section, we present an abstracted form of the civic
tech software development process, analyze how the unique
operating environment and other characteristics affect it, and
further reﬁne relationships between the concepts and actors.
1) Grassroots-driven
Civic
Technology
Software
Development Process
The civic technology group has a systematic development
process with four major stages: Requirements and goals
planning, architecture and data structure planning, iterative
development that starts with prototyping, and evaluation.
They are iterative and agile, with a possibility to return and
adjust any stage after evaluation. We call it systematic and
iterative because the group engaged in explicit meta-level
process selection and development stage before engaging
in actual software development. However, the process has
some inﬂexibilities, because the group has less cohesion and
face-to-face time. Due to those issues, the group relies more
on the established processes and silos of responsibility.
The development process and the ﬂow between process
stages are visualized in Fig. 5. The large arrows denote
transitions between project stages and the thin arrows

• Goal and requirements planning, and task allocation. The
unique characteristics of this stage that there is no formal
requirements engineering process. The planning starts as
a brainstorming session that tries to ﬁt the identiﬁed needs
with participant motivations. The planning leads results in
the group vision, which is an informal agreement on what the
project goal is and how it should be accomplished. From there
each task is allocated a task lead, who takes responsibility for
ensuring that each part of the project is ﬁnished. The tasks are
distributed based on individual interests and competencies.

• Architecture and data structure design. The design process
starts with architecture and data structure development. This
is because the group aims for the parallel development of
various software components that interact with standardized
data structures and application programming interfaces. In
order to enable parallel development, the group started both
projects with architecture and data structure design.

• Prototyping. After planning and architecture design, the lead
for each part designs a prototype that is evaluated against
the group vision. The prototyping process and evaluation can
also lead to new planning and task allocation if new needs
or required features are identiﬁed. The use of prototypes is
mainly internal and less used after the ﬁrst design iterations.

• Development. The development process follows an iterative
plan-consensus-action-evaluation loop that was described in
Fig. 4. It should be noted that as many features as possible
are developed in parallel, and evaluated individually. The
development of quality control features such as unit tests
and continuous integration pathways also proceeds simulta-
neously with development activities. Development is then
continuously informed by automatic testing. The automatic
testing feedback is personal, as opposed to group evaluation
and peer review, which is performed together with the team.

• Evaluation. Evaluation is performed in two ways. The
ﬁrst one is the evaluation of the technical quality of new
software contributions. It is carried out in GitHub and
facilitated by GitHub’s code review process, which allows
other team members to evaluate summaries of automated
testing results and review proposed changes to source code.
This code review process can lead to acceptance or rejection
of new contributions. The second type of evaluation is a
shared, qualitative evaluation of overall software quality and
functionality against the group vision. There are no formal
quality requirement criteria, and the evaluation depends on
the core group on agreeing whether the task outcomes meet
the desired level of quality. This type of evaluation leads
back to the re-negotiation of short term goals and new task
allocations. Some evaluations also affect group vision.

• Internal stakeholders with development goals driven by
team member motivations. All stakeholders are considered
internal to the project, in the sense that all concerned
parties are invited to participate in the project. The current
participants are mostly software engineers or from technical
backgrounds, which causes the projects to be considered
from a mostly technical background.

The team members adopt different roles in the process, with
the core group driving most of the processes forward and work
being coordinated by a project manager if one has been selected.
The mentor adopts a larger role in the planning and evaluation
phases and acts as a kind of a sparring partner. The mentor never
questions the goals themselves, allowing the team to be self-

• Skeptical external stakeholders. Grassroots-driven develop-
ment does not have backing from large civic, academic or
industrial organizations. Civic organizations can be unused
or negative to civic participation, such as Irish Water in
Dublin. One of the major challenges in new civic tech groups

Figure 5. The iterative stages of the civic tech group’s software development process

is to gain credibility and sell the idea of civic participation
to civic organizations. For example, what is technically
supposed to be open data, it is in practice closed from the
stakeholders whom the civic authority deems ”not worthy.”

beneﬁcial online tools. On the other hand, re-work and refac-
toring previous contributions are seen as less valuable, espe-
cially with the goal of achieving a minimum viable product.

• Short-term perception. The opportunistic decision-making,
ﬂuidity in team structure, and the drive to achieve a
minimum viable product discourage long-term planning.

• Meritocratic involvement. The more a participant does and
the more they demonstrate competence, the more authority
that participant gains. When a participant does more and
contributes more, they acquire more responsibility and
inﬂuence based on the respect and voluntary investment of
authority from others. This is emphasized in requirements
deﬁnition and evaluation. This leads to a emerging hierarchy,
who can steer the group through challenges. The more
ﬂuid the team becomes, the more a single person such as
a project manager gains responsibility.

V. DISCUSSION

The ﬁrst question is whether a grassroots-driven civic tech
group can set up a software engineering process. If we compare
the discovered process against four fundamental characteristics
of software engineering processes as deﬁned by Sommerville
[12, p. 9]: Software speciﬁcation, development, validation, and
evolution, we ﬁnd out that the process has each of the char-
acteristics. Even though the emphasis is on development and
validation, both speciﬁcation and evolution aspects are present.
If the group’s process is a software engineering process,
the question remains what kind of process it is, in relation to
existing literature. Perng and Kitchin [45] discussed Code for
Ireland from a civic and cultural perspective and deﬁned Code
for Ireland as a civic hacking group, where ”civic hacking
binds together elements of civic innovation and computer
hacking, with citizens quickly and collaboratively developing
technological solutions” [45, pp. 2]. Based on our ﬁndings,
we partly agree with this deﬁnition, though our discovery
is that the group has evolved to a phase where they have
systematized their process, and it has rigor beyond hacking.
Compared to existing software engineering processes deﬁned
in established literature [12, 46], the group’s process is unique.
It resembles agile methods most closely, conforming to the prin-
ciples of the agile manifesto6, with emphasis on individuals and
interactions, working software, collaboration over contracts, and
responding to change over following a plan. The signiﬁcant dif-
ference is that the team is most commonly distributed, and has

• Civic ghosting and the challenge in harnessing casual
participation. Some aspects of development are slowed by
mismatches in communicated and intended participation. The
unavoidable challenge caused by volunteering participants
is that some participants simply disappear without any
communication or ghost.

• Opportunistic decision-making and ﬂexibility in evaluation
in the sense of skills, resources, and goals (“what we can do
at the moment”). The team decides the next course of action
partly based on previous goals, and partly based on reﬂection
of team capabilities. Some essential tasks are delayed because
they are seen to be unachievable for now. Furthermore,
project stages stretch or shorten depending on how much
time and resources the volunteer participants have currently.

• Uncertain project stage duration and project inertia. Any
project stage or iteration has no speciﬁc duration because
the effort volunteers and other stakeholders can put in varies
constantly. The project scope, duration, or goals are adjusted
to reﬂect new resources and capabilities. Furthermore, the
longer something has been a certain way, the more entrenched
it becomes. This is can be a positive aspect, for example when
the group has decided on well-functioning architecture and

6

• Transitioning from planning to development to release.
Planning iterations [47] and explicit retrospectives [48] can
help development groups to shift gears when transitioning
between development stages. While the lack of resources can
make every moment feel important, it is important to take a
moment to re-evaluate processes and goals. At the same time,
goals should be clear and documented in shared knowledge
repositories. Documentation is more important in distributed
development groups than in other agile approaches [47].

• Group cohesion and trust. Without an external motivator
such as income, the group is dependent on internal
motivation to work together. As some of the participants
were new to volunteering-based work, organizing and
harnessing volunteer work was a challenge. In distributed
teams, Ramesh et al. [47] recommend building trust and
community by distributed partners, sponsor visits, and
building a cohesive team culture. Furthermore, clear and
constant communication by easy to access methods, social
media presence, or even a regular physical meeting location
will promote team communication and identity.

• External
mentoring
and
support.
Paradoxically,
a
grassroots-driven
approach
does
not
ensure
a
wider
citizen engagement. The group faced issues that have
solutions proposed by researchers, especially in community
engagement [32] and hand-off [8]. In this, the group could
beneﬁt from mentoring and lessons learned in the civic
technology and HCI research community.

• Towards a Civic Tech Toolkit. Although several frameworks
from projects in partnerships with citizens [7, 8, 10] have
outlined potential life-cycles to enhance social technology
development. Their application seems to be currently limited
to academic contexts. The creation of a civic tech toolbox
similar to the current toolkits for orchestrating citizen
sensing7 or hackathons8 could help to solve this issue by
allowing civic groups to discover, use, re-use and share
content and knowledge relevant for their causes.
While the group cannot address the lack of engagement
from civic organizations, Lee et al. [10] have listed actions
civic organizations have taken that allowed grassroots civic
technology groups to thrive. They included (1) legislation
to force civic bodies to publish data in a timely manner, (2)
publishing problem statements by cities to direct developer
attention, (3) stronger management and direct coordination by
city administrations, and (4) common app and crowd-sourced
data repositories, along with bottom-up engaged communities.

A. Lessons Learned and Recommendations for Practise
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant challenges the group faced
were due to the nature of the group and the operating
environment. All participants were inhabitants of Dublin who
wanted to effect change in their environment by the creation of
digital services. This means that all development efforts were
volunteered and any resources used were free or sponsored.
The group was held back by a lack of engagement by the civic
sector, which was a factor out of their control. However, some
issues could be addressed by improvements in the development
process and a more systematic approach to both citizen and
civic stakeholder engagement. We list some of the main
challenges and proposed remedies from literature as follows.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we investigated and described the software
engineering process of a grassroots-driven civic technology

• Civic ghosting and engaging newcomers. By using shared
duties and methods such as pair programming, which has
been found to increase agile learning in development pro-
cesses [48], the group would address several issues: Harden
any single feature under development against a participant

7Making Sense Toolkit: categories/toolkit
8The Hackathon Toolbox:
toolbox-essential-tools-practices

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work of the ﬁrst author was supported by the Ulla
Tuominen Foundation. This work was supported, in part, by
Science Foundation Ireland grant 13/RC/2094. We thank Lero,
the Irish Software Research Centre, for their support.

REFERENCES

[1] Knight
Foundation,
“The
Emergence
of
Civic
Tech
:
Investments
in
a
Growing
Field,”
2013.
[Online]. Available:
media/uploads/publication pdfs/knight-civic-tech.pdf
[2] T.
Steinberg,
“‘civic
tech’
has
won
the
name-game.
but
what
does
it
mean?”
2014,
(Accessed
on
09/12/2018).
[Online].
Available: