PHANTOM: Curating GitHub for engineered
software projects using time-series clustering

Peter Pickerill · Heiko Joshua Jungen ·
Miros law Ochodek · Micha l Ma´ckowiak ·
Miroslaw Staron

Received: date / Accepted: date

arXiv:1904.11164v2 [cs.SE] 30 Jun 2020

Abstract Context: Within the ﬁeld of Mining Software Repositories, there are
numerous methods employed to ﬁlter datasets in order to avoid analysing low-
quality projects. Unfortunately, the existing ﬁltering methods have not kept up
with the growth of existing data sources, such as GitHub, and researchers often
rely on quick and dirty techniques to curate datasets.
Objective: The objective of this study is to develop a method capable of ﬁltering
large quantities of software projects in a resource-eﬃcient way.
Method: This study follows the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology. The
proposed method, PHANTOM, extracts ﬁve measures from Git logs. Each mea-
sure is transformed into a time-series, which is represented as a feature vector for
clustering using the k-means algorithm.
Results: Using the ground truth from a previous study, PHANTOM was shown
to be able to rediscover the ground truth on the training dataset, and was able to
identify “engineered” projects with up to 0.87 Precision and 0.94 Recall on the val-
idation dataset. PHANTOM downloaded and processed the metadata of 1,786,601

Authors’ Pre-Print submitted to Empirical Software Engineering Journal — the ﬁnal paper is
available (Open Access) at

Peter Pickerill
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology
E-mail:

Heiko Joshua Jungen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology
E-mail:

Miros law Ochodek
Poznan University of Technology
E-mail:

Micha l Ma´ckowiak
Poznan University of Technology
E-mail:

Miroslaw Staron
Chalmers University of Technology | University of Gothenburg
E-mail:

2
Peter Pickerill et al.

GitHub repositories in 21.5 days using a single personal computer, which is over
33% faster than the previous study which used a computer cluster of 200 nodes.
The possibility of applying the method outside of the open-source community was
investigated by curating 100 repositories owned by two companies.
Conclusions: It is possible to use an unsupervised approach to identify engineered
projects. PHANTOM was shown to be competitive compared to the existing su-
pervised approaches while reducing the hardware requirements by two orders of
magnitude.

Keywords Mining software repositories · GitHub · Data curation · Curation
tools

1 Introduction

Software project analysis used to be performed on small corpora of projects, as seen
in industry-based case studies (Feldt et al (2013), Staron et al (2013b), Staron et al
(2013a)). However, since the widespread use of code sharing sites such as GitHub1,
researchers now have access to a massive corpus of software projects that can be
analysed. Consequently, we see more and more studies in the area of software
quality that base their research on mining GitHub repositories. Unfortunately, the
quality of these repositories is unclear. It has been shown that most repositories can
be considered to be of low quality, and could therefore skew analysis (Kalliamvakou
et al (2016)).
For instance, in the recent editions of the Mining Software Repositories (MSR)
conference, a number of studies performed analyses based on GitHub repositories.
The reported dataset sizes ranged between one to over 80,000 repositories (e.g. Cito
et al (2017), Gonzalez et al (2017), Noten et al (2017), Sadat et al (2017), Zhu et al
(2017), Rausch et al (2017), Macho et al (2017)), which is just 0.08% of the current
number. Most of these studies needed to ﬁlter out low-quality repositories from
the collection, where low-quality denotes those repositories that do not ﬁt into the
desired sample. One of the frequently used approaches to ﬁlter such repositories
is to rely on the project popularity. Unfortunately, it has been shown to perform
poorly (Munaiah et al (2017)). It is clear then, that for researchers to make use
of the large number of repositories available on GitHub, new ﬁltering methods are
required.
Munaiah et al (2017) proposed a ﬁltering method that outperformed traditional
ﬁltering approaches by using supervised classiﬁcation. With this framework, over
1.8 Million GitHub repositories have been analysed, what makes it one of the
largest datasets (Cosentino et al (2017)). While this is an impressive achievement,
a number of key issues with the method remain. First, the method analyses mul-
tiple artefacts to calculate the necessary metrics, i.e. Git logs, conﬁguration ﬁles,
source code, GitHub issues, license, unit tests. Consequently, the method has high
computing-resource demands (in the study, a computer cluster with over 200 nodes
to process the largest dataset and the task still required a month to complete).
Second, some artefacts require dedicated processing, depending on the program-
ming language and libraries used in the project. As a result, the proposed tool

1

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
3

might require further work to adapt it to changing trends in programming tech-
nologies. Finally, the method requires multiple project artefacts to be downloaded
and analysed; some of them might be out of interest for many studies using the
method to pre-process the data.
With this in mind, in this paper, we propose a new method called PHANTOM2

(Project History Analysis of Time-Series Method) that has the same purpose as
the method proposed by Munaiah et al. It uses unsupervised learning to distinguish
between “engineered” and “not engineered” projects at very large scale, solely based
on their development history, while using commodity hardware. We argue that it is
possible to achieve comparable results to Munaiah et al (2017) (which we refer to
as the baseline study) by applying the proposed unsupervised-learning method to
ﬁlter repositories. Since the proposed method is unsupervised, it could also help
the researchers to establish a ground truth by automatically grouping projects
which have similar characteristics. By using the development history exclusively,
we simplify the acquisition of data used for analysis, making it possible to perform
the analysis on commodity hardware. We validate PHANTOM on the datasets
published in the baseline study (Munaiah et al (2017)), extending it with additional
200 repositories. The method’s eﬃcacy is shown by using this dataset consisting of
850 labelled repositories from open source and 100 additional repositories owned
by companies. PHANTOM’s applicability for large-scale analyses is shown when
it is applied to the dataset of over 1.8 Million software repositories.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents and discusses
related studies. The problem statement and the design of the validation study are
presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the proposed method, which is further
validated in Section 5. We discuss the ﬁndings from the validation study in Section
6. Finally, we conclude our ﬁndings in Section 7.

2 Related Work

The large-scale projects analyses (including code analysis) are mainly performed
on open-source code repositories. With over 100 million Git repositories available,
GitHub is becoming one of the most important sources data that could be used
to study software source code and project-related phenomena. Unfortunately, the
quality of the data available on GitHub is questionable. For instance, Kalliamvakou
et al (2016) performed the quantitative analysis of project metadata and manual
investigation of a sample of 434 projects stored on Github to learn that the as-
sumption that every repository available on GitHub contains a software project
does not hold. In the studied sample, only 63.4% of the repositories were related
to software development. Also, most of the projects were personal—67% of the
projects had only 1 committer while 87% had 2 or less. Finally, most repositories
remained inactive or showed low activity (only 25% of the studied repositories
were active for over 100 days). Therefore, there is a need for ﬁltering repositories
that contain engineered software projects in order to reduce the chance of biasing
the results of MSR studies by poorly engineered projects.
The simplest and often used approach to ﬁlter unwanted repositories is to
rely on projects popularity, e.g. GitHub Stargazers (e.g. Padhye et al (2014); Ray

2 PHANTOM —

4
Peter Pickerill et al.

et al (2014); Casalnuovo et al (2015); Silva et al (2016); Russell et al (2018)). The
rationale behind using popularity as a ﬁltering criterion is that it is assumed to be
positively correlated with quality. However, as Sajnani et al (2014) have shown,
this might not be true.
Many studies used multi-stage pipelines to select a desirable sample of projects
from GitHub. Most of them query publicly available services such as GHTorrent.3

For instance, Vasilescu et al (2015); Yu et al (2015) selected projects by sequentially
querying GHTorrent and Travis API in a funnel-like manner to study continuous
integration practices. A similar approach was used by Gharehyazie et al (2018)
who studied software clones.
Some studies go beyond querying the metadata collected by GHTorrent by pro-
cessing project repositories and extracting metadata from their artefacts. Good
examples of studies implementing project analysers capable of processing such
repositories are Gabel and Su (2010) and Hebig et al (2016). They feature a high
level of automation, yet the resources required (e.g. time, computing power) are
large. Gabel and Su (2010) conducted a study about the uniqueness of source
code within C++, C# and Java applications taken from SourceForge.4 They ap-
proached the question of “how unique is software?” by performing lexical analysis
on a dataset of 6000 projects (in total 420 million lines of code). Following this, the
percentage of unique code within 30 selected projects was measured. The study
identiﬁed a general lack of uniqueness within software, where most programs are
made from code snippets found in other software. The analysis time took four
months, where source code was compared on a token-level with an optimised tool.
This shows that source-code analysis requires a lot of time even for a small number
of projects. Similarly, in the study by Hebig et al (2016) that aimed to ﬁnd GitHub
repositories containing UML models, the process of downloading and processing
the repositories took 6 weeks.
Cosentino et al (2017) looked into 80 studies that mined GitHub. They found
that the two largest data sources, GHTorrent and GitHub API5, were criticised by
researchers. The GitHub API was said to be a source of problems, given request
limitations and errors in the data returned. They state that “the GitHub API re-
quest limit acts as a barrier to getting data from GitHub”, which aﬀects curated
datasets (such as GHTorrent) and individual researchers. Many researchers criti-
cise the size and up-to-dateness of services like GHTorrent. Cosentino et al report
that of studies they explored, only three looked at more than 100,000 reposito-
ries. These ﬁndings show that despite using these services, researchers struggle to
collect up-to-date data at large scale.
Robles et al (2017) identiﬁed similar issues with GitHub when collecting infor-
mation about twelve million repositories. First, due to API limits, they calculated
that it would have taken fourteen months to collect all of the data using a single
API key, adding that “[. . . ] this would have made the data gathering unfeasible.”
To gather the data in a feasible time, twenty keys were used. Secondly, 25% of the
twelve million repositories had been moved or deleted between the time GHTorrent
collected its data and the researchers request to the GitHub API, which wasted
keys and analysis time. This shows that data collection time can be reduced by us-

3 Gousios (2013),
4
5

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
5

ing volunteered keys for data collection, a practice employed by GitHub mirroring
sites, like GHTorrent and Boa.6

Kalliamvakou et al (2016) observed that there are diﬀerent ways to merge
commits and GitHub cannot detect all of them. Therefore, some merges are not
reported through the API. A further peril when using the GitHub API is that,
unlike cloning with Git, the GitHub API does not redirect requests when a repos-
itory was moved. Accessing a moved repository with the API will result with a
not found status code.
Nu˜nez-Varela et al (2017) conducted a systematic review of 226 papers studying
source-code metrics. They identiﬁed that most studies considered one program-
ming language and paradigm. Over 85% of the studies use object-oriented metrics.
This is reﬂected in the available public datasets and metric-extraction tools. While
the paper does not reason why researchers focus on one language, it indicates that
cross-language analysis of source code may not be straightforward. They claim
that although the use of metrics “theoretically can be applied to any language”, in
practice, it is complex and tools do not support all languages.
Recently, Munaiah et al (2017) proposed a new automatic method along with
a tool called reaper that can be used to curate GitHub for engineered software
projects. The method classiﬁes GitHub repositories using seven dimensions: Com-
munity, Continuous integration, Documentation, History, Issues, License, and Unit
testing. reaper was used to download and process 1.8 million GitHub repositories.
The analysis required a computer cluster with over 200 nodes and took over a
month to complete. In the next step, the authors sampled the collected dataset
and manually labelled 500 repositories, of which 200 were used for validation. In
addition, they analyzed and manually labelled 150 repositories owned by organi-
zations such as Amazon, Apache, Facebook, Google, and Microsoft. They trained
and validated four classiﬁers (Random Forest and custom score-based classiﬁer)
using the collected data and applied them to predict the number of repositories
hosted on GitHub that contain engineered software projects. Depending on the
classiﬁcation algorithm and training dataset, the predictions of the number of
such repositories ranged between 6% and 70%. The most accurate classiﬁer pre-
dicted that only around 24% of the repositories contained engineered projects.
Also, they showed that the proposed classiﬁers outperform ﬁltering repositories
by their popularity.
Our study proposes a light-weight method for ﬁltering projects that comple-
ments the methods proposed in the above studies. The method processes only one
project artefact, the Git log, and extracts ﬁve measures directly from it (Integra-
tion Frequency, Commit Frequency, Integrator Frequency, Committer Frequency,
and Merge Frequency). Each of the measures (being a time series) are charac-
terised by a set of over forty manually-designed features (e.g. duration, amplitude,
positive and negative gradients). Since the method directly analyses the Git logs,
it does not suﬀer from the limitations of GitHub API or GHTorrent. Secondly,
it is programming language agnostic because it does not analyse the source code.
Its closest counterpart is the ﬁltering method proposed by Munaiah et al (2017),
since any both methods are based on machine-learning algorithms and have the
purpose of ﬁltering engineered software projects by a deﬁned quality. The main
diﬀerence between the two approaches is that they use diﬀerent artefacts to extract

6 Dyer et al (2013),

6
Peter Pickerill et al.

information about the projects and diﬀerent machine-learning algorithms. The ap-
proaches to ﬁltering projects proposed by other authors were developed to select
projects having particular, explicitly known characteristics that were interesting
for a given study (e.g. Vasilescu et al (2015) selected projects not being forks,
written in certain programming languages, and having 200+ pull requests). In the
case of distinguishing between engineered not engineered projects, it is diﬃcult to
explicitly provide such characteristics. However, even for such studies and others
that require processing other project artefacts than Git logs, the proposed method
could be used as a scanning tool as the ﬁrst step to quickly identify and reject
repositories containing not engineered projects and prevent wasting resources to
download and process their artefacts.

3 Research Methodology

The research conducted in this paper follows the Design Science Research (DSR)
methodology (Hevner et al (2004)). In particular, we decided to follow the guide-
lines provided by Wieringa (2014).
DSR is a problem-solving paradigm that focuses on creating and evaluating
artefacts and solutions for practical purposes. In design science, research follows
the engineering cycle—it is conducted iteratively until the objectives are reached.
The engineering cycle consists of ﬁve steps:

1. Problem investigation — understanding the problem and outlining the steps
to solve the problem and evaluate the solution.
2. Treatment design – designing an artefact which is used in the study (e.g. a
computer program).
3. Treatment validation — evaluating the artefact in a context similar to the
context where it is to be used (e.g. lab environment).
4. Treatment implementation — introducing the artefact into the context where
it is to be used (e.g. software development organization).
5. Implementation evaluation — evaluation of the eﬀects of the introduction of
the artefact on the context (e.g. check whether the program improved the
process of software development).

The ﬁrst three steps of the engineering cycle are called the design cycle. Ac-
cording to Wieringa, the design cycle is what is usually performed by researchers
when designing an artefact while the remaining two steps (treatment implementa-
tion and evaluation) can be done once the artefact is in the hands of its intended
users.
The design cycle begins with an investigation of the problem to gain an in-
depth understanding of the causes. The acquired knowledge is then used to design
a treatment. Treatment is deﬁned as the interaction of an artefact with a problem
context. The goal of the third step, treatment validation, is to conﬁrm that the
designed treatment satisﬁes all the requirements and whether the treatment is able
to treat the problem.
In our study, we performed a full design cycle to create a new method—
PHANTOM which is the method to analyse software projects, and the problem
context is to ﬁlter engineered projects from GitHub. Firstly, we investigate the
problem and deﬁne the requirements for the method by analysing the limitations

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
7

of the reaper tool proposed in the study by Munaiah et al (2017). Then we perform
a validation of the method by applying it to the datasets provided in the baseline
study and comparing the results between PHANTOM and reaper.
The goal of two remaining steps in the engineering cycle is to apply the treat-
ment to and investigate how it interacts with their real-world context. Treatment
evaluation is a scalable process and usually requires multiple applications of the
treatment to get a full understanding of its usefulness. Although we do not aim
to evaluate the method in this study, we apply PHANTOM to replicate the task
of ﬁltering nearly 1.8 Million real software repositories stored on GitHub in the
baseline study, what could be perceived as an initial evaluation of the method in
its real-life context, and apply it to recognise engineered projects in industrial Git
repositories.
In the remaining part of this section, we investigate the problem of ﬁltering
software repositories that justiﬁes the need for designing PHANTOM. Then, we
discuss the validation and evaluation procedures used in this study.

3.1 Problem Investigation

Munaiah et al (2017) provides an abstract deﬁnition of an engineered software
project which states that “a software project that leverages sound software engi-
neering practices in one or more of its dimensions such as documentation, test-
ing, and project management.” Later in their study, they customise it by stating
that “(a) an engineered software project is similar to the projects contained within
repositories owned by popular software engineering organizations such as Amazon,
Apache, Microsoft and Mozilla and7 (b) and engineered software project is similar
to the projects that have a general-purpose utility to users other than the devel-
opers themselves.” Since we partially base our study on the dataset provided by
Munaiah et al (2017), we follow these deﬁnitions of an engineered software project.
The existing methods for ﬁltering projects (and in particular ﬁltering engi-
neered projects) make trade-oﬀs between the depth of analysis and performance.
The lightweight approaches use community-based ﬁltering strategies, for example;
popularity, issues, and forks are common but do not measure the internal qual-
ity of a project. Unfortunately, these approaches are typically less accurate than
those relying on analysing project artefacts (Munaiah et al 2017) and cannot be
used on repositories without community interaction, for instance, those that are
hosted on private servers. The methods that perform deeper analyses of project
artefacts (e.g. reaper proposed by Munaiah et al (2017)) are more accurate but
require high computing power. These methods often analyse multiple project arte-
facts, including source code, which is time-consuming and require implementing
and maintaining dedicated analysis tools (e.g. to analyse code written in diﬀerent
programming languages). To mitigate performance problems, these methods often
rely on the metadata collected by publicly available services such as GHTorrent.
Unfortunately, multiple studies have reported problems and limitations of this ap-
proach. Also, the existing methods perform ﬁltering based on the cross-sectional

7 Although the deﬁnition provided by Munaiah et al (2017) uses and as the conjunction
between parts (a) and (b), we believe it should be or since they exclusively train classiﬁers
either on the repositories owned by the organisations or on the repositories containing general-
purpose utility projects.

8
Peter Pickerill et al.

assessments of projects, i.e. without taking into account their history. Finally,
the methods that base ﬁltering on supervised machine-learning algorithms require
manual labelling of the training data which is time-consuming.
Therefore, it seems that if one wants to create a new ﬁltering method that
analyses project artefacts, they should focus on reducing hardware requirements.
Also, it is worth considering basing the ﬁltering on chronological measures, which
not only reﬂect the current status of the project but also its history. Finally, it
would be preferable if the method does not require manual labelling of data, and
instead use unsupervised methods, such as clustering.
Chronological measures taken from repositories can be represented as a time-
series. In the ﬁeld of time-series clustering, a number of techniques are available.
Euclidean Distance and DTW (Ratanamahatana and Keogh 2004) are most com-
monly used, however they cannot compare time-series of very diﬀerent lengths.
Feature-based approaches have been shown as an eﬀective way to compare time-
series of diﬀerent lengths and reduce the dimensionality of the data signiﬁcantly
(e.g. Wang et al (2006), Deng et al (2013), Fulcher and Jones (2014), Guo (2008)).
However, extracted features must describe the time-series correctly to ensure ac-
curate clustering.
Git logs seem to be one of the most frequently analysed artefacts to extract fea-
tures used for ﬁltering projects. Also, it allows extracting chronological measures
describing trends in the development of a software project (e.g. commit frequency,
number of contributors). Commit frequency can tell much about the process and
practices employed by a software development team and reﬂects the changes made
in the ways of working (Zhao et al 2017). Also, the frequency of commits correlates
with the number of bug-introducing changes in software (Eyolfson et al 2014). The
relationship between commit frequency and overall quality of a project is also ob-
served by (Kolassa et al 2013), who stated that “the commit frequency is a fast
indicator to determine if the project is healthy because it has regular contribu-
tions and if the developers are productive by checking whether they contribute
regularly.” Kalliamvakou et al (2015) observed that industrial projects have more
merges resulting from pull requests. Even the number of reverted commits could
be an indicator of how the project team operates. According to Shimagaki et al
(2016) many reverted commits could be avoided if a team has good communication
practices and high change awareness. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that
the information about commit frequency might be a useful source of information
when ﬁltering engineered projects. We could expect that engineered projects will
exhibit diﬀerent characteristics of commit frequency in time (including merging
commits) not present in not engineered projects.
Taking the above into account, we deﬁne the following requirements for a new
project-ﬁltering method, which we call PHANTOM:

– Req1: All measures must be extractable from a Git log. — we want to limit the
number of artefacts that need to be processed to a single one, being Git log.
– Req2: Time-series must be characterised by feature vectors accurately. — we
want to extract chronological measures from Git log; since the feature-based
clustering seems to be the best option to compare time-series of diﬀerent
lengths, we need to ﬁnd a set of features that will correctly capture the most
important characteristics of the time-series (Esling and Agon 2012).

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
9

– Req3: The established ground truth can be discovered using unsupervised learn-
ing (without knowing the decision classes). — we have to verify that the pro-
posed method is able to identify clusters that are meaningful from the per-
spective of the problem of ﬁltering repositories containing engineered software
projects.
– Req4: The method performs well on commodity hardware at large-scale. — it is
the key requirement; it addresses the most important limitation of the existing
ﬁltering methods that analyse project artefacts.
– Req5: The method provides comparable accuracy to supervised methods. — the
existing approaches make a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and performance; the
proposed method is supposed to provide similar accuracy while reducing the
performance requirements.
– Req6: The method can be used to ﬁlter projects in diﬀerent contexts. — there is
a threat that the performance of an unsupervised method can be speciﬁc to a
single dataset only; therefore, we need to perform studies on diﬀerent datasets
coming from both open-source community and industry to mitigate that risk.

3.2 Treatment Validation

In order to validate PHANTOM, we performed a series of simulation studies on
the datasets published in the baseline study.
Munaiah et al (2017) published ﬁve datasets. These datasets are formatted
as collections of GitHub repository URLs. Four of these datasets (Organization8,
Utility, Negative Instances, and Validation) are used as ground truth in the valida-
tion of the proposed method, with the ﬁfth being referred to as the Large dataset
(a collection of over 1.85 Million URLs).
To create the ground truth datasets, Munaiah et al followed a manual curation
process in order to label repositories. Each repository was independently judged by
two or three researchers as either engineered or not, according to agreed guidelines.
If the judgement about a repository diﬀered, it was either discussed further or
discarded. The datasets are summarised in the list below:

– Organization — it consists of a set of 150 engineered repositories. Engi-
neered projects are deﬁned as similar to those of popular software engineering
companies such as Amazon, Apache and Facebook. The researchers manually
investigated repositories to ﬁnd those project that matched the deﬁnition.
– Utility — it consists of another set of 150 engineered repositories. It deﬁnes
an engineered project as one with a general-purpose. That is to say, a reposi-
tory that has value to users other than the developers. The repositories were
randomly sampled from 1,857,423 GitHub repositories.
– Negative Instances — it holds 150 repositories that are not engineered. The
repositories do not conform to either of the deﬁnitions of engineered project.
The dataset resulted from the selection process of the Utility dataset, which
means that it contains the ﬁrst 150 repositories that both authors rejected.

8 We preserve the original spelling of the dataset name used in the study by Munaiah et al
(2017).

10
Peter Pickerill et al.

– Validation — it consists of 100 engineered and 100 not engineered project
repositories. The selection process is similar to the one of the Utility dataset
and shares the deﬁnition of what is engineered and not.
– Large dataset — it is a collection of 1,857,423 GitHub URLs. In contrast
to the other datasets, there is no ground truth, meaning the quality of the
repositories is unknown.

Since the four ground-truth datasets contained labelled data, they allowed us
to validate the PHANTOM’s accuracy and compare it with the accuracy of reaper
proposed in the baseline study. While evaluating the accuracy of the methods
we used the popular prediction quality metrics Precision, Recall, F-Measure, and
Matthews Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC).
When predicting the label of an object and comparing the predicted label to
the actual label there are four possible outcomes: the object is correctly classiﬁed
to a positive class—true positive (TP), the object is falsely classiﬁed to a posi-
tive class—false positive (FP), the object is correctly recognised as not belonging
to the positive class—true negative (TN) and the object is falsely recognised as
not belonging to the positive class—false negative (FN). We calculate Precision,
Recall, F-Measure, and Matthews Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC) by aggregating
information about the outcomes for all classiﬁed cases.
We extended the previous study by comparing the accuracy of the baseline and
PHANTOM models on another sample of projects from the Large dataset. The
goal of this analysis was two-fold. First, it allowed us to compare the accuracy of the
models on a new dataset. Second, we were able to verify the validity of predictions
regarding the number of engineered software projects hosted on GitHub reported
in the baseline study and the ones obtained with the PHANTOM models.
We classiﬁed all instances from the Large dataset using the baseline and PHAN-
TOM models (we used a best-performing PHANTOM model for each of the mea-
sures considered by PHANTOM). Since we wanted to understand the similarities
and diﬀerences between the prediction made by the models, we used stratiﬁed sam-
pling to select 5 samples, each containing 50 project instances (the total number
of 250 instances):

– True/True — this was a sample of instances for which the best-performing
baseline models and PHANTOM models trained on the Utility dataset9 unan-
imously classiﬁed them as engineered projects.
– False/False — we randomly selected instances that were unanimously10 clas-
siﬁed as not engineered projects.
– False/True — a random sample of instances which were unanimously predicted
to be not engineered projects by the PHANTOM models and unanimously
predicted as engineered projects by the best-performing baseline models.
– True/False — a random sample of instances which were unanimously pre-
dicted to be engineered projects by the PHANTOM models and unanimously
predicted as not engineered projects by the best-performing baseline models.

9 The baseline study concluded that the best-performing models were trained using the
Utility dataset.
10 We ignored the predictions made by PHANTOM model trained using the ’merges’ time-
series after we had discovered that it was indicating nearly all repositories as engineered.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
11

Fig. 1 Overview of PHANTOM.

– Mixed — a random sample of the remaining repositories not ﬁtting to any
of the above categories. These were instances for which there was a partial
agreement between the prediction models.

All of the selected instances were then independently labelled by two or three
authors using the same criteria as in the baseline study for the Utility dataset. By
using this dataset, we were able to analyse how much the baseline and PHAN-
TOM models complement or contradict each other. Consequently, we were able to
assess the impact of the diﬀerences in the way they classify repositories on their
predictions of the number of engineered projects hosted on GitHub.
Finally, we applied the best-performing PHANTOM models to ﬁlter indus-
trial projects to investigate whether it is possible to use PHANTOM in diﬀerent
contexts. We introduced a new dataset (Industry) that contains 100 repositories
belonging to two companies. Company A is one of the fastest-growing software
agencies in the European Union. With its presence on the market for more than
ten years, it has successfully delivered over 1400 projects. Currently, it employs
more than 500 employees and develops products for multiple sectors, e.g. FinTech,
Healthcare, Tourism, E-commerce, Entertainment, and e-Government. It main-
tains around 500 Git repositories in a private GitHub space. Company B develops
embedded software for infrastructure projects. The dataset was labelled by the
employees of the companies.

4 PHANTOM—A Developed Artefact

PHANTOM (Project History Analysis of Time-Series Method) is a software-
repositories ﬁltering method that addresses the problems identiﬁed in Section 3.1.
The process used in PHANTOM is presented in Figure 1 and its steps are explained
in the subsequent paragraphs.

12
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 1 The format of the generated Git logs, each column is separated with a comma (UTS
refers to Unix Timestamp, GUID refers to Globally Unique Identiﬁer).

Hashes
Author
Committer
Name
Commit
Parent
Name
Email
Date
Name
Email
Date

Format
%H
%P
%an
%ae
%at
%cn
%ce
%ct
Type
GUID
GUID
String
String
UTS
String
String
UTS

Table 2 Example Git log, where each row is one commit.

Hashes
Author
Committer
Commit
Parent
Name
Email
Date
Name
Email
Date

b57f4f3
82c9f95
ab

1519904296
cd

1519904396
82c9f95
efaf9cd
ab

1519834072
ab

1519904296
efaf9cd
703b7b1
ab

1519404672
ab

1519824672

The input to the method is a collection of repository URLs, which locate the
repositories to be analysed. Each repository is cloned to the machine using Git
(Step A). Next, the Git log of the cloned repository is generated (Step B) in the
format deﬁned in Table 1, where each column is separated by a comma (,). From
now on, Git log will refer to this format.
An example Git log is presented in Table 2. The Git log contains timestamped
rows, which makes the conversion to time-series possible (Step C). These time-
series use combinations of the diﬀerent columns of the Git log and are referred
to as measures. We extract ﬁve measures: Commit Frequency (Commits), Inte-
gration Frequency (Integrations), Commiter Frequency (Commiters), Integrator
Frequency (Integrators), and Merge Frequency (Merges). These measures are de-
ﬁned in Table 3. As previously mentioned in the problem investigation (Section
3.1), many studies observed that commit frequency could be a valuable source of
information about the process and practices used in software development projects.
Our hypothesis is that the measures we extract from Git logs allow separating en-
gineered and not engineered projects, in a given dataset. They can be divided
into two groups. Commits, Integrations, and Merges characterise ways of working
and peace of the project. For instance, we could see periodic increases in the fre-
quency of commits, or long periods of inactivity, etc. The frequency of commits
seem to correlate with the quality of the project (Eyolfson et al 2014; Kolassa
et al 2013), therefore, they could help discriminate between engineered and not
engineered projects. Similarly, the code merging practices might be diﬀerent de-
pending on the capabilities of projects, as the number of merges tends to be greater
in commercial projects Kalliamvakou et al (2015). The remaining two measures
(Commiters and Integrators) provide information about the number of people in-
volved in the project at a given period of time. We expect that more attractive
projects bring more attention from the community and consequently more people
contribute to their codebase.
In Table 4, the example Git log is transformed into the ﬁve measures. Measures
are represented as a regular time-series, which makes their comparison possible;
however, considering very diﬀerent lengths, a direct comparison of the time-series
may not make much sense. Interpolation would mean that the data are manipu-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
13

Table 3 The measures extracted by PHANTOM.

Measure
Git
Log
Informa-
tion Used
Description

Commit Frequency
(Commits)

Author Date
The number of commits summed per Week

Integration
Fre-
quency
(Integra-
tions)

Committer Date
The
number
of
integrations
summed
per
Week.

Committer
Fre-
quency
(Commit-
ters)

Author Date, Au-
thor Email
The number of unique developers (by email)
that have made commits per Week

Integrator
Fre-
quency
(Integra-
tors)

Integrations
Date,
Integrations Email
The number of unique developers (by email)
that have made integrations per Week

Merge
Frequency
(Merges)

Parent
Hashes,
Committer Date
The number of merges summed per Week

Table 4 Example time-series for the ﬁve measures.

Date
Integrations
Integrators
Commits
Authors
Merges

2018-02-26
2
2
2
1
0
2018-02-19
1
1
1
1
0

lated, which the authors argue would not be a true representation of the devel-
opment history. The time-series are of very diﬀerent lengths (e.g. 50 weeks and
900 weeks). Therefore, DTW and Euclidean distance are not suitable. Instead, a
feature-based approach is selected, which does not come with these issues.
The time-series are therefore reduced in dimensionality by extracting a ﬁxed-
length feature vector (Step D). In the feature-based approach, a time-series is
represented by a feature vector. This feature vector is ﬁxed-length which makes
it compatible with common clustering algorithms. A feature vector consists of
a number of values that describe certain aspects of time series. For example, a
feature could be the lowest value within the sequence, which could be called Min
Y. Features can show very simple, or very complex characteristics (see Figure 2).
The up and down peaks of the time-series are marked using upward and downward
pointing triangles. To calculate the features Peak Up and Peak Down these points
are counted. A peak can be described as any point that is either higher or lower
than the preceding and succeeding points. Peak None is the sum of all points that
are not marked (e.g. at week 250). The feature Max Y is the largest value within
the time-series, which is roughly 4000 in the example. The position of Max Y is
captured by Max Y Pos, which is the index (week) in which the value occurred,
around 150 in the example. Duration is equal to the total number of weeks between
the ﬁrst point and the last point, illustrated by the bar close the x-axis.
In Figure 3 more features are illustrated. At the start of the time-series, a
subsequence is labelled to show a positive gradient. All positive gradients between
neighbouring observations are averaged to calculate the feature Mean Positive
Gradient. Similarly, the feature Mean Negative Gradient is calculated by averaging
the negative gradients. A further set of features relate to amplitude; Min Amp, Avg
Amp and Max Amp. Amplitude is the increase in value that is measured between

14
Peter Pickerill et al.

Fig. 2 Example features that can be extracted from a time-series.

Fig. 3 Example features that can be extracted from a time-series.

an up peak and its previous point, divided by the Max Y value. That means, it is
the increase relative to the maximum value. An example is shown at around week
250 in (b). The amplitude is labelled in the middle of the plot and for the purpose
of the example, the diﬀerence between the peak and the previous value is equal to
1000. The Max Y value of the time-series is roughly 4000, which therefore means
an amplitude of 25%. Min Amp is the lowest measured amplitude, Avg Amp is the
mean of all amplitudes, and Max Amp is the highest amplitude.
A complete list of the 42 extracted features is presented in Table 5. The mea-
sures are extracted separately, which means that there is one feature vector per
measure. In Table 6, a sample of the extracted features is presented. Some features
cannot be extracted from all measures. For example, peak-related features cannot
be measured on time-series with a length of three or less, because peaks cannot be
detected. Where features are immeasurable the value is set to zero (0) during the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
15

preprocessing step (Step E) because the k-means algorithm cannot handle missing
values. Each repository in the input collection is processed in this way. After this,
feature vectors are used in the subsequent steps.
Some of the features capture characteristics that might depend on the project
size (e.g. Sum y, Max. y). However, due to the manual investigation done by
the baseline study, we guess that larger projects better meet the deﬁnition of
engineered project and would rarely aim to deliver toy applications or solutions
to students’ homework assignments. Also, there are many features extracted by
PHANTOM that should not depend on the size of the projects but rather on the
changes in the “intensity” of product development (e.g. Min. TBP up, Max. TBP
up).
The next step is to select the best subset of features from the feature vector
(Step F). In order to remove redundant features, the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient
is calculated. If the correlation meets or exceeds a speciﬁed threshold the feature
is removed.
The remaining features are normalised with the standard score and then used
to ﬁt a k-means model (Step G). In this study, we divided observations into two
clusters and used the standard conﬁguration of k-means in the Python library
Scikit-Learn:11

– number of clusters = 2,
– number of initialisations = 10,
– centroid update algorithm = k-means++ (Lloyd’s algorithm),
– max iterations = 300.

Finally, the ﬁtted model is outputted. A new observation is classiﬁed to a
cluster by measuring its Euclidean distance to all centroids and assigning it to the
cluster represented by the closest one.
Although PHANTOM uses unsupervised models, it is worth to emphasise that
the features extracted and preprocessed in steps D and E could be used as an input
to supervised models, if the ground truth is available for the considered dataset.

5 Validation Results

We validated PHANTOM against each of the requirements deﬁned in Section 3.1.
For the requirements requiring evaluating the accuracy of the proposed method
or comparing it with the baseline study (reaper), we based the validation on the
datasets and prediction quality measures presented in Section 3.

5.1 All Measures Must Be Extractable From The Git Log (Req1)

The ﬁve measures extracted by PHANTOM are Integration Frequency, Commit
Frequency, Integrator Frequency, Committer Frequency, and Merge Frequency.
Each measure uses diﬀerent information from the Git log, along with at least one
of the two date types (author or committer date). The other parts of the Git log are
the author and committer email, and the number of parent commits (see Table 3).

11 Pedregosa et al (2011),

16
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 5 Features extracted by PHANTOM

Duration
Duration
Time interval in weeks between the ﬁrst and last week
of the time-series

Max. y
The highest value
Max. y Pos
The week number of the Max Y
Mean y
The average value
Sum y
The sum of all values
q25
The 25% quantile of values
q50
The 50% quantile of values
q75
The 75% quantile of values
std
The standard deviation of values

Y value

Peak down
The number of downwards facing peaks
Peak none
The number of peaks that are neither downwards, nor
upwards facing peaks
Peak up
The number of upwards facing peaks

Peaks

Min. TBP up

Avg. TBP up
Max. TBP up
Min. TBP down
Avg. TBP down
Max. TBP down

Time
between
peaks

The time between upwards facing peaks is measured
as the number of weeks between two neighbouring
peaks.

Min. amplitude
The amplitude is the diﬀerence in height between a
peak and the previous valley. This value is
normalised by dividing it with Max Y.
Avg. amplitude
Max. amplitude

Amplitude

Min. PPD
The positive peak deviation (PPD) is the diﬀerence
between the Mean Y value and the y value of a
upwards facing peak.
Avg. PPD
Max. PPD
Min. NPD
The negative peak deviation (NPD) is the diﬀerence
between the Mean Y value the y value of a
downwards facing peak.
Avg. NPD
Max. NPD

Positive and
negative peak
deviation

Min. PS

Avg. PS
Max. PS
Sum. PS
Min. NS
Avg. NS
Max. NS
Sum. NS

A sequence is, when at least two sequential gradients
have the same sign. Therefore, the positive (PS) and
negative sequences (NS) are numeric values, that
count the number of sequential same sign gradients.

Positive and
negative
sequences

Min. PG

Avg. PG
Max. PG
Min. NG
Avg. NG
Max. NG

Gradients are the diﬀerence between two
neighbouring y values.

Positive and
negative
gradients

PG Count
Number of positive gradients (PG)
NG Count
Number of negative gradients (NG)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
17

Table 6 Example feature vectors for the ﬁve measures.

Measure
Duration
Avg Y
Max Y

Integrations
2
1.5
2

Integrators
2
1.5
2

Commits
2
1.5
2

Authors
2
1
1

Merges
2
0
0

A
B

Fig. 4 Integration Frequencies for (A) and
com/FFmpeg/FFmpeg (B).

All of this information is available in every Git managed repository, and, in fact,
Git ensures its availability, because when committing changes, the information is
automatically recorded. PHANTOM has no dependency on additional data from
GitHub, such as the GitHub API and mirroring services like GHTorrent. Due to
the decision to use this speciﬁc set of information, PHANTOM is able to extract
all measures from Git logs exclusively.

5.2 Time-Series Must Be Characterised By Feature Vectors Accurately (Req2)

Feature vectors must capture the characteristics of time-series accurately to allow
k-means to ﬁnd meaningful clusters. It can be diﬃcult to select features that
do this. This problem is illustrated by the two integration frequencies plotted in
Figure 4, which were selected from an investigation of twenty repositories using
PHANTOM. The plots are visually distinguishable. However, when converted into
feature vectors, a small number of features, such as Max Y or Duration may not be
enough to diﬀerentiate two time-series from each other (see Table 7). The diﬀerence
between the Max Y values and the Duration values is 30 and 40 respectively. Max
Y and Duration are close enough that one can say that the time-series are similar
to each other. Therefore, crucial features are missing to diﬀerentiate them. An
additional feature such as the x value of the highest peak (Max Y Pos) would
show a clear diﬀerence between the two repositories. PHANTOM uses Duration,
Max Y, and Max Y Pos along with 40 additional features described in Table 5 to
characterise time-series.

18
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 7 Example feature vector for the time-series in Figure 4 (the values have been rounded).

Repository
Duration
Max Y
Max Y Pos

A (
870
470
160
B (
900
430
640

Even if a number of features are similar, the chances of an identical feature
vector for two diﬀerent time-series is reduced with a larger feature vector. By this,
the k-means algorithm is able to cluster time-series via feature vectors eﬀectively,
as those diﬀerences are clear. By using larger feature vectors, PHANTOM captures
the characteristics of time-series and the diﬀerences between them are highlighted.

5.3 The Established Ground Truth Can Be Discovered Using Unsupervised
Learning (Req3)

We used PHANTOM to ﬁt k-means models on the ground-truth datasets12. These
are the Organization and Utility datasets, which are both complemented with the
negative instances so they contain engineered and not engineered repositories to
almost equal parts. PHANTOM requires a correlation threshold to select the best
subset of features. As it is unknown which threshold is the best, we explored
thresholds ranging from 0.05 to 1, with a step size of 0.05. This means that for
each combination of datasets and measures, twenty models were ﬁtted. As k-means
is unsupervised, the true labels are not known to the algorithm when ﬁtting the
model, which enables a comparison of the produced cluster labels and the ground-
truth labels.
The comparisons of obtained prediction quality measures of Organization and
Utility datasets depending on the correlation threshold are presented in Figure 5.
On the Organization dataset, there are many models that achieve Precision and
Recall close to 1.0. On the utility dataset, the accuracy is lower with Precision
and Recall of up to 0.9. The high Precision and Recall indicate that the models
were able to rediscover the majority of true labels for both datasets. Overall,
the Organization repositories could be rediscovered with higher accuracy than the
Utility repositories. However, the accuracy largely depends on the dataset, measure
and correlation threshold. This shows that a ground truth could successfully be
discovered using an alternative, unsupervised technique.
Based on the results presented in Figure 5, we can also observe that setting
a threshold anywhere between 0.75 and 0.95 will result in obtaining very similar
accuracy of all the models.

5.4 The method Performs Well On Commodity Hardware At Large-Scale (Req4)

In order to validate the applicability of PHANTOM to process large-scale data,
we performed two analyses. In the ﬁrst one, we used PHANTOM to download and
process the labelled, smaller datasets; Utility, Negative Instances, and Validation

12 The features extracted by PHANTOM from the datasets and supplemental materials are
published under DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3483755.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
19

Fig. 5 The accuracy of k-means model thresholds against the the ground truth for the ﬁve mea-
sures (the Organization and Utility datasets combined with the Negative Instances dataset).

Table 8 Number of available repositories and timings to clone and generate the Git log for
them.

Dataset
Available Repositories
Time Taken

Organization
149 / 150
10:39 minutes
Utility
145 / 150
2:44 minutes
Negative Instances
138 / 150
1:53 minutes
Validation(engineered)
100 / 100
1:36 minutes
Validation(Not engineered)
98 / 100
1:18 minutes
Large
1,780,773 / 1,857,423
21.5 days

to extrapolate the results to the size of the Large dataset. Since the Organization
dataset comes from a diﬀerent selection process than the other datasets, it is not
used for this extrapolation. The second analysis is performed directly on the Large
dataset.

PHANTOM’s results for both analyses are presented in Table 8. For the smaller
datasets, it shows that 3.8% of the repositories were unavailable, which means they
have been deleted or made private. The total download time was 7.5 minutes for
500 repositories, which gives the average repository-download time of 0.94 seconds.
When these values are extrapolated up to the Large dataset (1,857,423 software
project repositories), the time to obtain the Git logs is estimated to be 20.2 days.

For the Large dataset, it took PHANTOM 21.5 days to obtain the Git logs for
1,780,773 (95.36% of all) repositories. This leaves 76,650 (4.64% of all) repositories
that were not available, due to either deletion or being made private. When con-
verting the Git logs to time-series, some of the logs had to be excluded from the
analysis, because of a formatting problem; Logs with author and committer names
that contain a comma (,) had to be excluded, because the additional comma made
the correct separation of information impossible since Git logs are saved as CSV
ﬁles. For this reason 9,606 (0.5% of the obtained) Git logs had to be discarded.
The remaining 1,771,167 Git logs were converted to time-series and feature vectors
were extracted.

20
Peter Pickerill et al.

Fig. 6 The accuracy of k-means model thresholds against the the Validation data for the
ﬁve measures (ﬁtted on the Organization and Utility datasets combined with the Negative
Instances dataset).

5.5 The Method Provides Comparable Accuracy To Supervised Methods (Req5)

In the baseline study, custom Score-based and Random Forest classiﬁers were
trained on the Organization and Utility ground-truth datasets (each combined
with the instances from the Negative Instances dataset). The classiﬁers were then
used to predict the Validation dataset. In order to compare k-means to these
algorithms, PHANTOM is applied to the same datasets. First, similarly to Section
5.3, PHANTOM explores a range of thresholds for each combination of datasets
and measures. This time, however, the ﬁtted models are used to predict repositories
from the Validation dataset. Accuracy when predicting repositories is shown in
Figure 6. As already seen in Figure 5, the accuracy varies across measures, datasets,
and thresholds. Although we base our discussion of the PHANTOM accuracy based
on the results obtained for the best-performing PHANTOM models, we can see
in Figure 6 that choosing any threshold between 0.75 and 0.95 would result in
models having very similar ﬁltering accuracy.
To compare the results against the baseline study, the best models for each
dataset and measure are selected. In order to achieve this, the authors established
a set of rules that determine the best model:

1. Find the highest F-Measure.
2. Find the highest Precision.
3. Find the highest Recall.
4. Find the lowest correlation threshold.

These rules are implemented in PHANTOM which automates the feature se-
lection process. The best models are presented in tables 9 and 10.
Before comparing the accuracy of PHANTOM models with the classiﬁers from
the baseline study, we ﬁrst compare their accuracy to the accuracy of three na¨ıve
classiﬁers (uniform random, stratiﬁed random, and selecting the most frequently
appearing class). The F-Measure for these classiﬁers were equal to 0.52, 0.51, and
0.67, respectively. By looking at the results presented in tables 9 and 10, we can
see that all of the best-performing PHANTOM models visibly outperformed the
na¨ıve classiﬁers.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
21

Table 9 Prediction accuracy for the ﬁve measures when clustering repositories. (Organization
models)

Measure
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
MCC
Features

Merges
0.90
0.68
0.85
0.76
0.48
17
Integrators
0.75
0.82
0.71
0.77
0.57
9
Integrations
0.90
0.75
0.93
0.83
0.64
19
Commits
0.90
0.75
0.94
0.83
0.65
19
Committers
0.75
0.82
0.71
0.77
0.57
11

Table 10 Prediction accuracy for the ﬁve measures when clustering repositories. (Utility
models)

Measure
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
MCC
Features

Merges
0.85
0.68
0.84
0.75
0.47
11
Integrators
0.45
0.83
0.69
0.76
0.56
5
Integrations
0.95
0.86
0.70
0.78
0.61
22
Commits
0.95
0.87
0.70
0.78
0.62
22
Committers
0.75
0.83
0.71
0.77
0.58
8

Table 11 The accuracy of the baseline’s tool reaper as reported in Munaiah et al (2017).

Data set
Classiﬁer
Precision
Recall
F-Measure

Organization
Score-based
0.76
0.61
0.68
Organization
Random Forest
0.88
0.42
0.57

Utility
Score-based
0.58
0.99
0.73
Utility
Random Forest
0.82
0.86
0.84

The accuracy of the models proposed in the baseline study is presented in
Table 11. The baseline classiﬁers, trained on the Organization dataset, achieves
a lower F-Measure than any PHANTOM model ﬁtted to the same data. PHAN-
TOM matches the Precision and surpasses the Recall of the supervised algorithms.
Classiﬁers trained on the Utility dataset set a higher benchmark than classiﬁers
trained on the Organization dataset. PHANTOM matches the F-Measure of the
score-based classiﬁer. Although the highest Precision on the Utility dataset of 0.82
could be surpassed by two out of ﬁve PHANTOM models (Integrations, Commits),
the Recall on these was lower than the one obtained for the RF classiﬁer. Interest-
ingly, the RF classiﬁer trained on the Organization dataset in the baseline study
performed visibly worse than one of the na¨ıve classiﬁers. Also, the Score-based
classiﬁer trained on the same dataset achieved an F-Measure only 0.01 higher
than the na¨ıve classiﬁer.
As a follow-up analysis, we trained a set of Random Forest classiﬁers13 us-
ing the measures and extracted features provided by PHANTOM to investigate
whether the features allow obtaining similar results to the baseline study. The
prediction accuracy of the RF Classiﬁers are presented in tables 12 and 13. The
F-Measure scores obtained for the best RF models for the Organization and Utility

13 We used the default conﬁguration of Random Forest provided by the Scikit-Learn library
since Munaiah et al (2017) did not provide information about the RF meta-parameters they
used in their study.

22
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 12 Prediction accuracy for the ﬁve measures and Random Forest classiﬁers. (Organi-
zation models)

Measure
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
MCC

Merges
0.95
0.58
0.72
0.59
Integrators
0.94
0.44
0.60
0.48
Integrations
0.94
0.47
0.63
0.51
Commits
0.93
0.38
0.54
0.43
Committers
0.93
0.42
0.58
0.46

Table 13 Prediction accuracy for the ﬁve measures and Random Forest classiﬁers. (Utility
models)

Measure
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
MCC

Merges
0.74
0.78
0.76
0.51
Integrators
0.78
0.75
0.77
0.54
Integrations
0.78
0.80
0.79
0.57
Commits
0.77
0.79
0.78
0.56
Committers
0.80
0.75
0.77
0.56

datasets were equal to 0.72 and 0.79 respectively. For the Organization dataset,
the F-Measure was higher by 0.15 when compared to the corresponding RF mod-
els in the baseline study, while for the second dataset, it was lower by 0.05. This
conﬁrms that the features extracted by PHANTOM allow separating instances of
engineered and not engineered projects for both unsupervised and supervised mod-
els. Nevertheless, when compared to the accuracy of PHANTOM, the F-Measure
scores for PHANTOM were higher by 0.11 for the ﬁrst dataset and lower by 0.01
for the second one than for the RF classiﬁers trained using the same features.
Thus, it seems that the unsupervised model used by PHANTOM can achieve
higher prediction accuracy than RF for some cases.
Finally, we compared the accuracy of the models on the sample of the Large
dataset (see Section 3.2). The baseline study concluded that the number of engi-
neered projects in the Large dataset is 24%, which was the prediction made by
the best-performing model (RF trained on the Utility dataset). The predictions
made by other models diﬀered visibly and ranged from 6% to 70%. We estimated
the accuracy of the best model to be ca. 0.72 with the 0.95 Conﬁdence Interval
(CI)14 between 0.57 and 0.83.
We selected the PHANTOM models that performed best on the Validation
dataset and applied them to classify the projects in the Large dataset. This means
that ten models (one for each combination of ground-truth dataset and measure)
were used to predict the repository labels for the Large dataset. In tables 14 and
15, the best models and the number of repositories predicted to be engineered
are presented. Out of these models, six resulted in a percentage of engineered
repositories between 35% and 40% and two resulted in 55%. The remaining two
models resulted in 19% and 96%. Accuracy for all the PHANTOM models but one
was slightly lower than the best model from the baseline study (ca. -0.03).

14 We ﬁrst calculated Accuracy for each stratum, and then aggregated them using the
weighted average with weights being the numbers of observations belonging to strata in the
Large dataset.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
23

Fig. 7 Accuracy for the baseline and PHANTOM models on the sample from the Large
dataset.

Table 14 Results from PHANTOM on 1,771,167 repositories from the Large dataset. Each
row represents one model (Organization models).

Measure
Threshold
# of engineered
% of engineered
Acc
Acc 0.95 CI

Merges
0.9
343,818
19%
0.69
(0.53, 0.79)
Commits
0.9
704,995
40%
0.65
(0.49, 0.76)
Committers
0.75
688,260
39%
0.67
(0.52, 0.78)
Integrations
0.9
700,501
39%
0.65
(0.49, 0.76),
Integrators
0.75
688,260
38%
0.67
(0.52, 0.78)

Figure 7 shows the comparison between the accuracy of the baseline and
PHANTOM models for a sample of the repositories from the Large dataset. We can
see that whenever the models were unanimous in predictions (for ca. 35% of the
repositories) they achieved the highest accuracy ca. 0.75. On the contrary, when
the baseline and PHANTOM models strongly disagreed, their accuracy dropped
visibly, even to the level of random guessing. However, there should be only around
6% of such instances. For the remaining cases, the accuracy of the best models
ranged between 0.6 and 0.7 (for ca. 59% of the repositories).

The most accurate PHANTOM model predicted the number of engineered
repositories to be 19%, which is quite similar to the prediction made by the best
model from the baseline study. However, it is important to emphasise that the
predictions made in both studies could be aﬀected by a visible error because the
accuracy of the models was ca. 0.70.

Most of the false-positive repositories contained student assignments, automat-
ically exported code, private sandboxes, and web applications with no documenta-
tion (usually developed using the Ruby on Rails and Django frameworks). Many of
these repositories contained code of applications or services, however, they did not
provide enough information to decide whether the application is intended to be
used by anyone else than the authors. Many of the False Positives are repositories
for student assignment projects. They are often well-structured and documented.
However, the main question is whether the outcomes of such projects may attract
external users. When it comes to False Negatives, they were dominated by the
repositories containing very small utility tools (e.g. often having the form of a
single script), showcase applications, and plugins/extensions.

24
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 15 Results from PHANTOM on 1,771,167 repositories from the Large dataset. Each
row represents one model (Utility models).

Measure
Threshold
# of engineered
% of engineered
Acc
Acc 0.95 CI

Merges
0.85
1,716,118
96%
0.41
(0.29, 0.55)
Commits
0.95
985,213
55%
0.68
(0.54, 0.79)
Committers
0.75
690,371
39%
0.67
(0.52, 0.78)
Integrations
0.95
983,553
55%
0.68
(0.54, 0.79)
Integrators
0.45
617,042
35%
0.68
(0.54, 0.79)

5.6 The Method Can Be Used To Filter Projects In Diﬀerent Contexts (Req6)

When the best-performing classiﬁers for each of the measures were applied to
the Industry dataset, they predict that the percentage of repositories containing
engineered software projects is between 12% and 95%. The most accurate PHAN-
TOM model (Merges, Organization) classiﬁed repositories with F-Measure and
MCC equal to 0.89 and 0.53, respectively.
We discussed the results with the companies’ employees. They categorised the
Git repositories based on their contents. The resulting categories are presented
in Table 16. It turned out that only 35 of the repositories contained source code
of products developed for external customers. According to the employees, these
repositories should be identiﬁed as containing engineered projects. As it is shown
in Table 16, most of the classiﬁers correctly indicated that the majority of the
repositories belong to this decision class (the average accuracy was equal to 0.70).
The best-performing model on the Large dataset (Merges, Organization) correctly
recognised 94% of them as containing engineered projects while the corresponding
model trained on the Utility dataset (Merges, Utility) was able to correctly classify
all of them.
The second group of categories contains repositories storing internal libraries
and reusable components which are parts of products developed by Company A
(UI component, Ruby gems or extensions, npm packages, or Python libraries). As
we can see, most of these repositories were correctly indicated as the ones con-
taining engineered projects. Repositories that were misclassiﬁed as not engineered
software projects were mostly micro-projects having short or irregular development
histories.
The third category contains repositories storing examples, snippets, spike so-
lutions, and template solutions. According to the employees, nearly all of these
repositories should be classiﬁed as containing not engineered projects. PHAN-
TOM models correctly recognized “toy projects”, however, they misclassiﬁed not-
engineered projects that had long and active histories of development (e.g. a pat-
tern application).
The next category groups forked repositories of external libraries that were
modiﬁed and used by Company A. These repositories were correctly indicated as
containing engineered projects. However, it shows that there is a need for manually
identifying the forks of repositories to avoid including clones of repositories when
conducting MSR studies on the GitHub data since they can bias the results.
The ﬁfth group of categories includes repositories that store source code of
applications developed during Hackathon sessions or being the result of internal
Research & Development. These were mostly considered by the employees as not

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
25

engineered projects and correctly identiﬁed as such by the PHANTOM models.
However, there were a few projects that have matured over time and are now regu-
larly used in Company A (categorised as internal APIs and internal applications).
The best-performing PHANTOM model on the Large dataset correctly classiﬁed
1 out of 2 internal API projects and 83% of internal applications.
The sixth group of categories contains repositories storing the code of inter-
nal tools (scripts), infrastructure code (e.g. Docker), or setup (conﬁgurations).
Although some of the tools could be considered as engineered software projects,
most of the infrastructure and setup repositories should be regarded as not engi-
neered. All of the projects belonging to these categories were correctly classiﬁed
by the best-performing PHANTOM classiﬁer.
Finally, the remaining category groups repositories containing documentation
(usually in the form of markdown ﬁles). Interestingly, some of the repositories
were falsely identiﬁed as containing engineered projects. Those that were most
frequently misclassiﬁed contained knowledge bases that are regularly used and
updated within Company A, making their commit histories similar to active soft-
ware development projects. This revealed a limitation of relying on Git commit
frequencies when training classiﬁers instead of analysing multiple project artefacts.
Therefore, it might be worth to extend the list of features to include the extensions
of the ﬁles being modiﬁed in the project to ﬁlter such cases.
From this analysis, we conclude that the classiﬁers trained on Git logs coming
from publicly available repositories can be used to identify repositories contain-
ing engineered software projects in industrial settings. The results were conﬁrmed
by the employees of the companies owning the repositories. However, we identi-
ﬁed two limitations of the proposed approach; First, one needs to manually ﬁlter
repositories being “forks” (unless they are supposed to be the subject of the anal-
ysis). Second, Git log commit frequencies do not allow distinguishing between the
repositories storing application source code and the ones storing documentation
written in the markdown language.

6 Discussion

PHANTOM extracts ﬁve measures in the form of a time series. Then, 42 fea-
tures are extracted that characterise each of the time series. The measurement
and feature extraction process are done directly on the Git log without the need
of accessing any external sources of information (e.g. bug trackers, continuous inte-
gration servers), analysing project artefacts (e.g. project documentation or source
code) or any Git-hosting-site speciﬁc information (e.g. GitHub Pull Requests).
This allows PHANTOM to be used to curate Git repositories independently of the
infrastructure used to host them.
Also, the validation shows that PHANTOM was able to rediscover the ground
truth of the software repository datasets published in the baseline study by Mu-
naiah et al (2017), in which software projects were manually labelled. Many of the
PHANTOM (unsupervised) models were able to achieve Precision and Recall close
to 1.0. That conﬁrms that the measures and extracted features are descriptive
enough to allow diﬀerentiating between engineered and not engineered software
projects.

26
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 16 The predictions made by the PHANTOM models for the Industry dataset

# of
Inte-
Inte-
Commi-
Inte-
Inte-
Commi-

0.73
0.89
0.81
0.84
0.84
0.81
0.85
0.18
0.84
0.84
0.36

Recall
0.72
0.91
0.79
0.83
0.84
0.77
0.96
0.11
0.88
0.89
0.24

Precision
0.80
0.87
0.84
0.85
0.84
0.84
0.76
0.67
0.80
0.80
0.75

MCC
0.24
0.53
0.33
0.38
0.36
0.31
0.08
-0.07
0.23
0.25
0.00

Project
35
35
0.70
0.94
0.66
0.86
0.89
0.60
1.00
0.03
0.89
0.91
0.23

UI Component
4
4
0.70
0.75
1.00
0.50
0.50
1.00
1.00
0.50
0.75
0.75
0.25

Ruby gem
5
4
0.60
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.00
0.60
0.60
0.00

npm package
1
1
0.80
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00

Extension
3
2
0.73
0.67
1.00
0.67
0.67
1.00
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67

Library
1
1
0.80
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00

Example/Snippet
9
2
0.44
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.44
0.44
0.78
0.33
0.33
0.78

Pattern app
1
0
0.20
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Spike solution
2
0
0.55
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.00
1.00
0.50
0.50
1.00

Fork
12
12
0.82
1.00
0.92
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.75
0.08
0.92
0.92
0.58

Hackathon
2
0
0.90
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

R&D
1
0
0.90
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Tool
7
5
0.76
1.00
1.00
0.71
0.71
1.00
0.71
0.43
0.86
0.86
0.29

Internal API
2
2
0.70
0.50
1.00
0.50
0.50
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
1.00
0.00

Internal app
6
6
0.55
0.83
0.50
0.67
0.67
0.50
1.00
0.00
0.67
0.67
0.00

Infrastructure
3
1
0.60
1.00
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.33
0.33
0.67
0.67
0.33

Setup
2
0
0.80
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.50
0.50
1.00

Documentation
4
0
0.40
0.50
0.75
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.00
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.50

Type
N
eng. Average Merges grators grations Commits
ters
Merges grators grations Commits
ters

Organization dataset
Utility dataset

100
75

F-Measure

Accuracy

By comparing the prediction accuracy of the PHANTOM models presented
in tables 9 and 10 with the accuracy of the classiﬁer in the baseline study pre-
sented in Table 11, it is clear that the PHANTOM models can compete with the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
27

supervised approaches. Committers model achieved slightly higher F-Measure and
Recall for the Organization study than the best classiﬁer in the baseline study,
and higher Precision for the Utility dataset. This shows, that k-means is a com-
petitive alternative to supervised algorithms for the considered problem. When
the features extracted by PHANTOM were used to train supervised models (Ran-
dom Forest), they obtained similar accuracy than the corresponding models in the
baseline study.
Also, PHANTOM reduces the number of measures needed for analysis from
seven taken by reaper to one. Although ﬁve measurements were experimented
with, four of them show competitive results when used on their own. This shows
that with only limited information, accurate predictions can be made about the
quality of a repository. For instance, PHANTOM can produce competitive results
with Commit Frequency alone, which is also taken by reaper as part of the seven
extracted measures (as a monthly average). This shows that PHANTOM was able
to achieve similar accuracy, with a subset of the data used by reaper (i.e. one-
seventh), by choosing a diﬀerent representation.
Since measurements are taken from the Git logs, rather than other sources
(e.g. source code, GitHub API, GHTorrent), private or closed-source repositories
can now be cross-analysed with open-source ones. PHANTOM also avoids the
limitations of other sources such as out-of-date information and API key sharing.
PHANTOMs working assumption is that the programming language of a repos-
itory is not relevant. As the Git log is independent of the programming language, it
can analyse projects of any programming language, which is a signiﬁcant improve-
ment over reaper. However, the authors must admit that the eﬃcacy of PHANTOM
on other programming languages has not been established, since the large dataset
contains repositories from a set number of languages, which are the ones supported
by reaper.
PHANTOM achieved a 33% reduction in data collection time over reaper,
however, 4.64% of the repositories were unavailable. It took 21.5 days to generate
the Git logs for the Large dataset, or one second per repository, which is within
1.3 days of the extrapolated analysis time of 20.2 days.
PHANTOM reduced the hardware requirements over reaper by two orders
of magnitude. Reaper analysed the Large dataset using a computer cluster of
200 nodes, while PHANTOM achieved the same using a desktop computer.15

Furthermore, the authors found that the hardware resources were not exhausted
(RAM, CPU), spending most of the time idle. The majority of analysis time is
spent waiting for downloads to complete, rather than Git log extraction. However,
the bandwidth was not a limiting factor in the analysis. The bandwidth available
to the machine on which PHANTOM ran was 1 Gbps. The authors observed the
download speed, which rarely exceeded 40 Mbps. This shows that bandwidth was
not the constraint one might expect it to be, but it was rather the speed at which
repositories can be downloaded from GitHub.
Taking into account the reduction in requirements on both processing time and
hardware with respect to reaper that used a cluster of computers, we can conclude
that PHANTOM performs well on commodity hardware, even at large scale.

15 Computer hardware and operating system used in this study: Intel i5 CPU, 1Gbps Ether-
net, 1TB HDD, 16GB DDR3 RAM, Lubuntu 17.10.

28
Peter Pickerill et al.

Table 17 Comparison between reaper and PHANTOM.

Aspect
reaper
PHANTOM

Data Collection Time
>1 month
3 weeks
Hardware Requirements
Computer cluster (200 nodes)
Desktop computer
Measures
7 measures
1 measure
Data Sources
GHTorrent, source code
Git
Sample Size
1,857,423
1,771,167
Machine Learning approach
Supervised
Unsupervised
F-Measure (Organization)
68%
77%
F-Measure (Utility)
84%
76%
Percentage engineered
24%
19%
Programming Languages Supported
C, C#, C++, Java, PHP,
Any
Python, Ruby
Implementation Languages
Python
Python, Rust

When both PHANTOM and reaper are applied to the Large dataset (unla-
belled data), the best models obtained similar accuracy ca. 0.70. When PHAN-
TOM and reaper were unanimous in their predictions, they were usually correct.
We also observed that there were ca. 6% of instances for which the models pro-
vided strongly contradict predictions and have the accuracy similar to random
guessing. Finally, the best-performing models provided similar predictions of the
number of engineered projects hosted on GitHub, being 19% and 24%. However,
the remaining PHANTOM models, that were only slightly less accurate than the
best-performing model, estimated this ratio to 38–55%.
To summarise the discussion, we present a side-by-side comparison between
PHANTOM and reaper in Table 17.
We applied PHANTOM to curate 100 repositories owned by two companies
and learned that the models calibrated on the open-source datasets were able to
correctly identify repositories containing projects developed for customers. Un-
fortunately, we have also observed that the method is not able to recognise the
repositories being “forks” or to distinguish between the code of software applica-
tions and the documentation written using the markdown language. Still, we did
not ﬁnd any repositories that would contain only documentation in the analysed
sample of 250 repositories from the Large dataset. Therefore, the impact of the
latter issue on the results of our study could be considered as negligible.
Based on the results, we cannot ﬁrmly state which of the measures provide
the best capabilities of ﬁltering engineered projects. Therefore, it is worth consid-
ering using ensembles of PHANTOM models (e.g. use the majority voting). We
also recommend setting the correlation threshold between 0.75 and 0.90 since the
resulting models should have very similar accuracy.

6.1 Threats to Validity

Since we mostly base our study on the datasets published by the baseline study,
we are exposed to similar threats to validity.

Constructs Validity The general deﬁnition of “engineered software project” refers
to practices leveraged by a software project while the customised deﬁnition pro-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
29

posed by Munaiah et alis based on the notion of similarity between software
repositories. Although Munaiah et al were investigating the quality of project
artefacts in seven dimensions while constructing the reference Organization and
Utility datasets, it does not prove the equivalence of both deﬁnitions.
In our study, we use ﬁve measures (Integration Frequency, Commit Frequency,
Integrator Frequency, Committer Frequency, and Merge Frequency) that are taken
from Git logs and have the form of time series (measurement performed in time).
Therefore, they could reﬂect the ways of working in the projects, also revealing
some periodic behaviour. However, none of these measures can be used to evaluate
the quality of artefacts (e.g. quality of code or software documentation).

Internal Validity These ﬁve measures we use in the study have been selected by
the authors and may not provide full characteristics of the repositories. In addi-
tion, feature vectors contain 42 features, which are also chosen by the researchers.
Although attention has been paid to choose features that are reﬂective of the time
series, no rigorous process was followed to ensure they were so.
The procedure of determining the ground truth for the datasets published in
the baseline study by Munaiah et al and for the Industry dataset diﬀer. For the
latter dataset, we base it on the opinion of the companies’ employees. Although we
believe that the employees had enough information to judge whether the predic-
tions made by PHANTOM were correct (i.e. having direct access to the code and
other project’s artefacts, knowledge about the projects and processes used in the
companies), we interviewed only one representative from each company to verify
the predictions. Finally, we used diﬀerent versions of the PHANTOM tool to ana-
lyze the datasets published by Munaiah et al and the Industry dataset. Therefore,
there could be some diﬀerences in the feature-extraction algorithm between the
versions that could inﬂuence the results. However, since we use diﬀerent feature
sets, the impact of these diﬀerences should be minor and negligible.

External Validity The ground truth of the dataset published by Munaiah et al
(2017), which is based on a description of 300 engineered and 150 not engineered
repositories may not agree with other collections of repositories. Although the
authors cannot conﬁrm the correctness of the ground truth, PHANTOM uses un-
supervised models that were able to rediscover the ground truth by using only
the features space. The produced clusters agree with the ground truth to a large
degree, which supports its correctness. That being said, the possibility also ex-
ists that both PHANTOM and the ground truth are wrong and this agreement is
coincidental. However, the additional studies performed on a new sample of repos-
itories from the Large dataset and the study performed on the Industry dataset
showed that the method could be used in diﬀerent contexts.
Also, we have to accept the fact that the statements about the download speed
may not be relevant to researchers with diﬀerent hardware, Internet connection,
or an alternative agreement with GitHub.
Finally, the predicted number of engineered projects in the Large dataset dif-
fers between PHANTOM models. A similar observation was made in the baseline
study, for which the predicted percentage of engineered projects for the Large
dataset ranged between 6% and 70%. However, the predictions made by two best-
performing models in both studies provided similar estimates. Nevertheless, we

30
Peter Pickerill et al.

believe that the predictions made by both studies should be taken with caution
since the level of uncertainty is high.

6.2 Ethical Considerations

The most important ethical consideration concerns the Git logs published as part
of this paper, which contain the names and emails of GitHub users. Although these
are publicly available, the authors have anonymised this data to protect the users
privacy, in accordance with GitHub terms and conditions. Therefore, the published
Git logs contain placeholder names and emails which neither hinder analysis nor
leak sensitive information.
A further ethical consideration is the collection of repositories from GitHub.
Although the repositories are publicly available, mining data on the scale seen in
this paper is not generally acceptable behaviour according to GitHubs terms of
service GitHub (2018). The authors came to an agreement with GitHub about the
duration and use of GitHubs servers, and how the collection should be carried out.
GitHub has requested that the details of this agreement should not be published,
because it is speciﬁc between GitHub and the authors. It is important to emphasise
that contacting GitHub before mining is a necessity for ethical research, due to the
terms of service. This extends (beyond cloning from GitHub) to using the GitHub
API.

7 Conclusions

The amount of available software repositories rises everyday; between January
2014 and March 2018 the number of GitHub repositories rose from 10.6 million to
over 80 million, an increase of 780%. This dramatic increase has not been matched
by analysis methods so far. In order to make use of this large corpus of data, it is
essential to ﬁlter out undesirable repositories, however as Munaiah et al (2017) puts
it: “there are limited means of separating the signal (e.g. repositories containing
engineered software projects) from the noise (e.g. repositories containing homework
assignments).”
The problem with the majority of applied ﬁltering techniques when mining
software repositories is that they are inaccurate or unproven. Munaiah et al (2017)
introduced a new method(reaper) that achieves high accuracy, but requires the
computing power of a computer cluster, and cannot be applied to all repositories
as it is based on static analysis of code.
In this study, we proposed a new method called PHANTOM that improves on
existing methods with respect to analysis time and hardware requirements, with-
out sacriﬁcing accuracy. Therefore, the barrier for researchers, who often do not
have access to expensive hardware, is removed. PHANTOM achieves this by using
a time-series representation as input to create feature vectors describing proper-
ties of the time-series (e.g. the number of peaks). These time-series are based on
information from the development history and are transformed to feature vectors
that can be used with machine learning algorithms for smarter comparison. In
particular, this makes the time-series compatible with a standard k-means algo-
rithm, which is used to cluster the repositories into two groups; engineered and

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
31

not engineered. As a result, PHANTOM allows researchers to automatically and
inexpensively ﬁlter large datasets of unknown quality and remove repositories that
are undesirable for further more speciﬁc analysis.
In the performed validation, PHANTOM was able to rediscover a ground truth
of 450 repositories, with the best k-means models achieving up to 1.0 Precision
and Recall. When applied to new, unseen data, the best models in PHANTOM
achieved up to 0.87 Precision or 0.94 Recall. The MCC of the best models was
overall positive, with the highest being 0.65. This is competitive to the best su-
pervised classiﬁers from the baseline study by Munaiah et al (2017) that reported
0.88 Precision and 0.99 Recall on the same datasets. PHANTOM obtained the
metadata of 1,786,601 GitHub repositories in 21.5 days, which is over 33% faster
than reaper, and reduced the hardware requirements by two orders of magnitude.
The best-performing model predicted that 19% of the analysed GitHub reposito-
ries contain engineered projects, compared to 24% reported in the baseline study.
Finally, we applied PHANTOM to curate 100 repositories owned by two compa-
nies and learned that the model is capable of recognising external products as
engineered projects. However, we also identiﬁed some limitations of the method in
correctly identifying forked repositories and repositories containing documentation
as engineered software projects.
Because of the limitations of existing curating methods, many studies mining
software repositories use inaccurate or unproven ﬁltering approaches (e.g. popu-
larity). PHANTOM could be applied in such studies to improve the data curation
process. For example, Robles et al (2017) published a collection of 24,000 reposi-
tories, for which PHANTOM could be useful to ﬁlter out undesirable repositories.
Such use cases are possible because PHANTOM is not dependent on mirroring
services like GHTorrent. Any Git repository, not just those available through such
services, can be analysed, making PHANTOM also suitable for research on private,
or very speciﬁc collections of repositories. Furthermore, PHANTOM is program-
ming language agnostic.

Acknowledgements This research has been supported by Software Center (
center.se), Chalmers | University of Gothenburg, and the statutory funds of Poznan University
of Technology.

References

Casalnuovo C, Devanbu P, Oliveira A, Filkov V, Ray B (2015) Assert use in github projects.
In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software Engineering-Volume 1,
IEEE Press, pp 755–766
Cito J, Schermann G, Wittern JE, Leitner P, Zumberi S, Gall HC (2017) An Empirical Analysis
of the Docker Container Ecosystem on GitHub. In: IEEE International Working Conference
on Mining Software Repositories, pp 323–333, DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.67
Cosentino V, Canovas Izquierdo JL, Cabot J (2017) A Systematic Mapping Study of Software
Development With GitHub. IEEE Access DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2682323
Deng H, Runger G, Tuv E, Vladimir M (2013) A time series forest for classiﬁcation and feature
extraction. Information Sciences 239:142–153, DOI 10.1016/j.ins.2013.02.030, arXiv:1302.
2277v2
Dyer R, Nguyen HA, Rajan H, Nguyen TN (2013) Boa: A language and infrastructure for
analyzing ultra-large-scale software repositories. In: Proceedings of the 2013 International
Conference on Software Engineering, IEEE Press, pp 422–431

32
Peter Pickerill et al.

Esling P, Agon C (2012) Time-series data mining. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
45(1):1–34,
DOI
10.1145/2379776.2379788,
URL

doid=2379776.2379788{%}5Cn
Eyolfson J, Tan L, Lam P (2014) Correlations between bugginess and time-based commit
characteristics. Empirical Software Engineering 19(4):1009–1039
Feldt R, Staron M, Hult E, Liljegren T (2013) Supporting software decision meetings:
Heatmaps for visualising test and code measurements. In: Proceedings - 39th Euromi-
cro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications, SEAA 2013,
DOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.61
Fulcher BD, Jones NS (2014) Highly comparative feature-based time-series classiﬁcation. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 26(12):3026–3037, DOI 10.1109/TKDE.
2014.2316504, 1401.3531
Gabel M, Su Z (2010) A study of the uniqueness of source code. In: Proceedings of the eigh-
teenth ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Foundations of software engineering -
FSE ’10, p 147, DOI 10.1145/1882291.1882315, URL
cfm?doid=1882291.1882315
Gharehyazie M, Ray B, Keshani M, Zavosht MS, Heydarnoori A, Filkov V (2018) Cross-project
code clones in github. Empirical Software Engineering pp 1–36
GitHub (2018) Github terms of service - user documentation. URL
com/articles/github-terms-of-service/#c-acceptable-use
Gonzalez D, Santos JC, Popovich A, Mirakhorli M, Nagappan M (2017) A Large-Scale Study
on the Usage of Testing Patterns That Address Maintainability Attributes: Patterns for
Ease of Modiﬁcation, Diagnoses, and Comprehension. In: IEEE International Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp 391–401, DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.8, 1704.
08412
Gousios G (2013) The ghtorrent dataset and tool suite. In: Proceedings of the 10th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, MSR ’13,
pp 233–236, URL
Guo C (2008) Time Series Clustering Based on ICA for Stock Data Analysis pp 1–4
Hebig R, Quang TH, Chaudron MR, Robles G, Fernandez MA (2016) The quest for open
source projects that use uml: mining github. In: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 19th
International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, ACM, pp
173–183
Hevner AR, March ST, Park J, Ram S (2004) Design science in information systems research.
MIS quarterly 28(1):75–105
Kalliamvakou E, Damian D, Blincoe K, Singer L, German DM (2015) Open source-style collab-
orative development practices in commercial projects using github. In: Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Software Engineering-Volume 1, IEEE Press, pp 574–585
Kalliamvakou E, Gousios G, Blincoe K, Singer L, German DM, Damian D (2016) An in-
depth study of the promises and perils of mining GitHub. Empirical Software Engineer-
ing 21(5):2035–2071, DOI 10.1007/s10664-015-9393-5, URL
s10664-015-9393-5, 2597073.2597074
Kolassa C, Riehle D, Salim MA (2013) The empirical commit frequency distribution of open
source projects. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Open Collabora-
tion, ACM, p 18
Macho C, McIntosh S, Pinzger M (2017) Extracting Build Changes with BUILDDIFF. In:
IEEE International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp 368–378,
DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.65, 1703.08527
Munaiah N, Kroh S, Cabrey C, Nagappan M (2017) Curating GitHub for engineered
software
projects.
Empirical
Software
Engineering
22(6):3219–3253,
DOI
10.1007/
s10664-017-9512-6
Noten J, Mengerink JG, Serebrenik A (2017) A data set of OCL expressions on GitHub. In:
IEEE International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp 531–534,
DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.52
Nu˜nez-Varela AS, P´erez-Gonzalez HG, Mart´ınez-Perez FE, Soubervielle-Montalvo C (2017)
Source code metrics: A systematic mapping study. Journal of Systems and Software DOI
10.1016/j.jss.2017.03.044
Padhye R, Mani S, Sinha VS (2014) A study of external community contribution to open-
source projects on github. In: Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories, ACM, pp 332–335

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
33

Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Pretten-
hofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg V, Vanderplas J, Passos A, Cournapeau D, Brucher M, Perrot
M, Duchesnay E (2011) Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 12:2825–2830
Ratanamahatana C, Keogh E (2004) Everything you know about dynamic time warp-
ing is wrong. Third Workshop on Mining Temporal and Sequential Data pp 22–25,
DOI 10.1097/01.CCM.0000279204.24648.44, URL
googlecode.com/svn/trunk/docs/Dynamictimewarping/DTW{_}myths.pdf
Rausch T, Hummer W, Leitner P, Schulte S (2017) An Empirical Analysis of Build Failures
in the Continuous Integration Workﬂows of Java-Based Open-Source Software. In: IEEE
International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp 345–355, DOI
10.1109/MSR.2017.54
Ray B, Posnett D, Filkov V, Devanbu P (2014) A large scale study of programming languages
and code quality in github. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, ACM, pp 155–165
Robles G, Ho-Quang T, Hebig R, Chaudron MR, Fernandez MA (2017) An extensive dataset
of UML models in GitHub. IEEE International Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories pp 519–522, DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.48
Russell PH, Johnson RL, Ananthan S, Harnke B, Carlson NE (2018) A large-scale analysis of
bioinformatics code on github. PloS one 13(10):e0205898
Sadat M, Bener AB, Miranskyy A (2017) Rediscovery datasets: Connecting duplicate reports.
In: IEEE International Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp 527–530,
DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.50, 1703.06337
Sajnani H, Saini V, Ossher J, Lopes CV (2014) Is popularity a measure of quality? an analysis
of maven components. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance
and Evolution, IEEE, pp 231–240
Shimagaki J, Kamei Y, McIntosh S, Pursehouse D, Ubayashi N (2016) Why are commits
being reverted?: a comparative study of industrial and open source projects. In: 2016
IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE,
pp 301–311
Silva D, Tsantalis N, Valente MT (2016) Why we refactor? confessions of github contributors.
In: Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations
of Software Engineering, ACM, pp 858–870
Staron M, Hansson J, Feldt R, Meding W, Henriksson A, Nilsson S, H¨oglund C (2013a)
Measuring and visualizing code stability - A case study at three companies. In: Proceedings
- Joint Conference of the 23rd International Workshop on Software Measurement and
the 8th International Conference on Software Process and Product Measurement, IWSM-
MENSURA 2013, DOI 10.1109/IWSM-Mensura.2013.35
Staron M, Meding W, Hoglund C, Eriksson P, Nilsson J, Hansson J (2013b) Identifying implicit
architectural dependencies using measures of source code change waves. In: Proceedings
- 39th Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications,
SEAA 2013, DOI 10.1109/SEAA.2013.9
Vasilescu B, Yu Y, Wang H, Devanbu P, Filkov V (2015) Quality and productivity outcomes
relating to continuous integration in github. In: Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting
on Foundations of Software Engineering, ACM, pp 805–816
Wang X, Smith K, Hyndman R (2006) Characteristic-based clustering for time series data.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 13(3):335–364, DOI 10.1007/s10618-005-0039-x
Wieringa R (2014) Design Science Methodology for Information Systems and Software En-
gineering. DOI 10.1145/1810295.1810446, URL
doid=1810295.1810446
Yu Y, Wang H, Filkov V, Devanbu P, Vasilescu B (2015) Wait for it: determinants of pull
request evaluation latency on github. In: 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on
Mining Software Repositories, IEEE, pp 367–371
Zhao Y, Serebrenik A, Zhou Y, Filkov V, Vasilescu B (2017) The impact of continuous integra-
tion on other software development practices: a large-scale empirical study. In: Proceedings
of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
IEEE Press, pp 60–71
Zhu C, Li Y, Rubin J, Chechik M (2017) A dataset for dynamic discovery of semantic changes
in version controlled software histories. In: IEEE International Working Conference on
Mining Software Repositories, pp 523–526, DOI 10.1109/MSR.2017.49