Using Neural Networks for Relation Extraction
from Biomedical Literature

Diana Sousa⋆, Andre Lamurias, and Francisco M. Couto

LASIGE, Faculdade de Ciˆencias, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal

Abstract. Using diﬀerent sources of information to support automated
extracting of relations between biomedical concepts contributes to the
development of our understanding of biological systems. The primary
comprehensive source of these relations is biomedical literature. Several
relation extraction approaches have been proposed to identify relations
between concepts in biomedical literature, namely, using neural networks
algorithms. The use of multichannel architectures composed of multiple
data representations, as in deep neural networks, is leading to state-of-
the-art results. The right combination of data representations can even-
tually lead us to even higher evaluation scores in relation extraction
tasks. Thus, biomedical ontologies play a fundamental role by providing
semantic and ancestry information about an entity. The incorporation
of biomedical ontologies has already been proved to enhance previous
state-of-the-art results.

arXiv:1905.11391v2 [cs.CL] 18 Sep 2020

Keywords: Relation Extraction, Biomedical Literature, Neural Net-
works, Deep Learning, Ontologies, External Sources of Knowledge

1
Introduction

Biomedical literature is the main medium that researchers use to share their
ﬁndings, mainly in the form of articles, patents, and other types of written
reports [1]. A researcher working on a speciﬁc topic needs to be up-to-date
with all developments regarding the work done on the same topic. However, the
volume of textual information available widely surpasses the ability of analysis
by a researcher, even if restricting it to a domain-speciﬁc topic. Not only that,
but the textual information available is usually in an unstructured or highly
heterogeneous format. Thus, retrieving relevant information requires not only a
considerable amount of manual eﬀort but is also a time-consuming task.
Scientiﬁc articles are the primary source of knowledge for biomedical entities
and their relations. These entities include human phenotypes, genes, proteins,
chemicals, diseases, and other biomedical entities inserted in speciﬁc domains.
A comprehensive source for articles on this topic is the PubMed platform [2],
combining over 29 million citations while providing access to their metadata.
Processing this volume of information is only feasible by using text mining so-
lutions.

2
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

Automatic methods for information extraction (IE) aim at obtaining useful
information from large data-sets [3]. Text mining uses IE methods to process
text documents. Text mining systems usually include named-entity recognition
(NER), named-entity linking (NEL), and relation extraction (RE) tasks. NER
consists of recognizing entities mentioned in the text by identifying the oﬀset of
its ﬁrst and last character. NEL consists of mapping the recognized entities to
entries in a given knowledge base. RE consists of identifying relations between
the entities mentioned in a given document.

RE can be performed by diﬀerent methods, namely, by order of complexity,
co-occurrence, pattern-based (manually and automatically created), rule-based
(manually and automatically created), and machine learning (feature-based,
kernel-based, and recurrent neural networks (RNN)).

In recent years, deep learning techniques, such as RNN, have proved to
achieve outstanding results at various natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
among them RE. The success of deep learning for biomedical NLP is in part due
to the development of word vector models like Word2Vec [4], and, more recently,
ELMo [5], BERT [6], GPT [7], Transformer-XL [8], and GPT-2 [9]. These mod-
els learn word vector representations that capture the syntactic and semantic
word relationships and are known as word embeddings. Long Short-Term Mem-
ory (LSTM) RNN constitute a variant of artiﬁcial neural networks presented as
an alternative to regular RNN [10]. LSTM networks deal with more complex
sentences, making them more ﬁtting for biomedical literature. To improve their
results in a given domain, it is possible to integrate external sources of knowledge
such as domain-speciﬁc ontologies.

The knowledge encoded in the various domain-speciﬁc ontologies, such as the
Gene Ontology (GO) [11], the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI)
ontology [12], and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) [13] is deeply valu-
able for detection and classiﬁcation of relations between diﬀerent biomedical
entities. Besides that, these ontologies make available important characteristics
about each entity; they also provide us with the underlying semantics of the
relations between those entities, such as is-a relations. For example, neoplasm
of the endocrine system (HP:0100568), a phenotypic abnormality that describes
a tumor (abnormal growth of tissue) of the endocrine system is-a abnormality
of the endocrine system (HP:0000818), and is-a neoplasm by anatomical site
(HP:0011793), which in turn is-a neoplasm (HP:0002664) (Fig. 1).

The information provided by the ancestors is not expressed directly in the
text and can support or disprove an identiﬁed relation. Ontologies are formally
organized in machinereadable formats, facilitating their integration in relation
extraction models.

Using diﬀerent sources of information, as additional data, to support au-
tomating searching for relations between biomedical concepts contributes to the
development of pharmacogenomics, clinical trial screening, and adverse drug re-
action identiﬁcation [14]. Identifying new relations can help validate the results
of recent research, and even propose new experimental hypotheses.

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
3

Neoplasm
(HP:0002664)

Abnormality of the

Neoplasm by
anatomical site

endocrine system

(HP:0000818)

(HP:0011793)

Neoplasm of the
endocrine system

(HP:0100568)

Fig. 1. An excerpt of the HPO ontology showing the ﬁrst ancestors of neoplasm of the
endocrine system, using is-a relationships

2
Related Work

This section presents the basic concepts and resources that support Relation Ex-
traction (RE) deep learning techniques, namely, Natural Language Processing
(NLP), Text Mining Primary Tasks, and initial approaches for Relation Extrac-
tion.

2.1
Natural Language Processing

Natural language processing (NLP) is an area in computer science that aims
to derive meaning from unstructured or highly heterogeneous text written by
humans. NLP covers several techniques that constitute preprocessing steps for
the tasks described in Subheading 2.2. These NLP techniques have diﬀerent goals
and are often combined to obtain higher performance.

– Tokenization: has the purpose of breaking the text into tokens to be pro-
cessed individually or as a sequence. These tokens are usually words but can
also be phrases, numbers and other types of elements. The most straightfor-
ward form of tokenization is breaking the input text by the use of whitespace
or punctuation. However, with scientiﬁc biomedical literature, that is usu-
ally descriptive and formal, we have to account for complex entities like
human phenotype terms (composed of multiple words), genes (represented
by symbols), and other types of structured entities. These entities tend to be

4
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

morphologically complex and need specialized tokenization pipelines. Some
researchers use a compression algorithm [15], byte pair encoding (BPE), to
account for biomedical vocabulary variability. BPE represents open vocabu-
laries through a ﬁxed-size vocabulary of variablelength character sequences,
making it suitable for neural networks models.
– Stemming and Lemmatization: aims at reducing the variability of natu-
ral language by normalizing a token to its base form (stem) [16]. It can also
take into account the context of the token, along with vocabulary and mor-
phological analysis to determine the canonical form of the word (lemma).
The stem can correspond only to a fragment of a word, but the lemma is
always a real word. For instance, the stem of the word having is hav and the
lemma is have.
– Part-of-Speech Tagging: consists of assigning each word of a sentence to
the category where it belongs taking into account their context (e.g., verb or
preposition). Each word can belong to more than one category. This feature
is useful to gain information on the role of a word in a given sentence.
– Parse Tree: represents the syntactic structure of a sentence. There are two
diﬀerent types of parse trees: constituency-based parse trees and dependency-
based parse trees. The main diﬀerence between the two is that the ﬁrst dis-
tinguishes between the terminal and non-terminal nodes and the second does
not (all nodes are terminal). In constituency-based parse trees, each node of
the tree is either a root node, a branch node, or a leaf node. For each given
sentence there is only one root node. The branch node connects to two or
more child nodes, and the leaf node is terminal. These leaves correspond
to the lexical tokens [17]. Dependency-based parse trees are usually sim-
pler because they only identify the primary syntactic structure, leading to
fewer nodes. Parse trees generate structures that are used as inputs for other
algorithms and can be constructed based on supervised learning techniques.

2.2
Text Mining Primary Tasks

Text mining has become a widespread approach to identify and extract informa-
tion from unstructured or highly heterogeneous text [18]. Text mining is used
to extract facts and relationships in a structured form that can be used to an-
notate specialized databases and to transfer knowledge between domains [19].
We may consider text mining as a sub-ﬁeld of data mining. Thus, data mining
algorithms can be applied if we transform text to a proper data representation,
namely, numeric vectors. Even if in recent years text mining tools have evolved
considerably in number and quality, there are still many challenges in applying
text mining to scientiﬁc biomedical literature. The main challenges are the com-
plexity and heterogeneity of the written resources, which make the retrieval of
relevant information, that is, relations between entities, a nontrivial task.
Text Mining tools can target diﬀerent tasks together or separately. Some of
the primary tasks are Named Entity Recognition (NER), Named-Entity Linking
(NEL) and Relation Extraction (RE).

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
5

– Named Entity Recognition (NER): seeks to recognize and classify en-
tities mentioned in the text by identifying the oﬀset of its ﬁrst and last
character. The workﬂow of this task starts by splitting the text in tokens
and then labeling them into categories (part-of-speech (POS) tagging).
– Named-Entity Linking (NEL): maps the recognized entities to entries
in a given knowledge base. For instance, a gene can be written in multiple
ways and mentioned by diﬀerent names or acronyms in a text. NEL links
all these diﬀerent nomenclatures to one unique identiﬁer. There are several
organizations dedicated to providing identiﬁers, among them the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) for genes, and the Human
Phenotype Ontology (HPO) for phenotypic abnormalities encountered in
human diseases.
– Relation Extraction (RE): identiﬁes relations between entities (recog-
nized manually or by NER) in a text. Tools mainly consider relations by
the co-occurrence of the entities in the same sentence, but some progress is
being made to extend this task to the full document (taking into account a
global context) [20].

The workﬂow of a typical RE system is presented in Fig. 2.

2.3
Initial Approaches for Relation Extraction

Through the years, several approaches have been proposed to extract relations
from biomedical literature [22]. Most of these approaches work on a sentence
level to perform RE, due to the inherent complexity of biomedical literature.

– Co-occurrence: assumes that if two entities are mentioned in the same
sentence (co-occur), it is likely that they are related. Usually, the application
of this approach results in a higher recall (most of the entities co-occurring in
a sentence participate in a relation), and lower precision. Some methods use
frequency-based scoring schemes to eliminate relations identiﬁed by chance
[23]. Nowadays, most applications use co-occurrence as a baseline against
more complex approaches [24].
– Pattern-based: uses manually deﬁned patterns and automatically gener-
ated patterns to extract relations. Manually deﬁned patterns require
domain expertise knowledge about the type of biomedical entities, their in-
teractions, and the text subject at hand. Initial systems made use of regular
expressions to match word patterns that reﬂected a relation between two en-
tities [25], making use of a dictionary of words that express relation, such as
trigger and stimulate. Later systems introduce part-of-speech when applied
to complex sentences, such as the ones that we typically ﬁnd in biomedical
literature [26]. Opposite to the co-occurrence approaches, manually deﬁned
patterns frequently achieve high precision but tend to have poor recall. This
approach does not generalize well, and therefore is diﬃcult to apply to new
unseen data. Automatically generated patterns encompass two main
approaches, bootstrapping with seeds [27] and leveraging of the corpora [28].

6
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

Input Text

The CRB1 gene is a key target in the ﬁght against blindness.

Tokenization

The_CRB1_gene_is_a_key_target_in_the_ﬁght_against_blindness.

Part-of-speech (POS) Tagging

The_CRB1_gene_is_a_key_target_in_the_ﬁght_against_blindness.

DET
NP
NP
VP
DET
AD
NP
PP
DET
NP
PP
NP

Named-Entity Recognition (NER)

CRB1, blindness

Named-Entity Linking (NEL)

CRB1 – 23418 (NCBI), blindness – DOID:1432 (Disease Ontology)

Parsing (Shallow/Full)

S

NP

VP

PP
The CRB1 gene
is

PP

NP

a key target
in

NP

against

NP

blindness

the ﬁght

Relation Extraction (RE)

CRB1targets blindness

Fig. 2. Workﬂow of a simpliﬁed RE system. (Text obtained from [21])

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
7

The bootstrapping method uses a small set of relations known as seeds (e.g.,
gene-disease pairs). The ﬁrst step is to identify the seeds in the data-set and
map the relation pattern they describe. The second step is to try to apply
the mapped patterns to the data-set to identify new pairs of relations that
follow the same construction. Finally, the original set of relations is expanded
by adding these new pairs. When after repeating all previous steps no more
pairs are found, the process ends. Some systems apply distant supervision
techniques to keep track of the validity of the added patterns. Distant su-
pervision uses existing knowledge base entries as gold standards to conﬁrm
or discard a relation. This method is susceptible to noisy patterns, as the
original set of relations grows. On the other hand, the leveraging of the cor-
pora method makes immediately use of the entire data-set to generate the
patterns. This method requires a higher number of annotated relations and
produces highly speciﬁc patterns that are unable to match new unseen data.
Automatically generated patterns can achieve a higher recall than manually
deﬁned patterns, but overall the noisy patterns continue to damage the pre-
cision. Nevertheless, there are a few eﬀorts to reduce the number of noisy
patterns [29].
– Rule-based: also uses manually deﬁned and automatically generated rules
from the training data to extract relations. Depending on the systems, the
diﬀerences between pattern-based and rule-based approaches can be minor.
Ruled-based approaches not only use patterns but also additional restraints
to cover issues that are diﬃcult to express by patterns, such as checking
for the negation of the relations [30]. Some ruled-based systems distance
themselves from pattern-based approaches by replacing regular expressions
with heuristic algorithms and sets of procedures [31]. Like pattern-based
approaches, ruled-based approaches tend to have poor recall, even though
rules tend to be more ﬂexible. The trade-oﬀrecall/precision can be improved
using automatic methods for rule creation [32].
– Machine Learning (ML)-based: usually makes use of large annotated
biomedical corpora (supervised learning) to perform RE. These corpora are
preprocessed using NLP tools and then used to train classiﬁcation models.
Beyond Neural Networks, described in detail in Subheading 3, it is possible
to categorize ML methods into two main approaches, Feature-based and
Kernel-based. Feature-based approaches represent each instance (e.g.,
sentence) as a vector in an n-dimensional space. Support Vector Machines
(SVM) classiﬁers tend to be used to solve problems of binary classiﬁcation,
and are considered black-boxs because there is no interference of the user
in the classiﬁcation process. These classiﬁers can use diﬀerent features that
are meant to represent the data characteristics (e.g., shortest path, bag-of-
words (BOW), and POS tagging) [33]. Kernel-based approaches main
idea is to quantify the similarity between the diﬀerent instances in a data-
set by computing the similarities of their representations [34]. Kernel-based
approaches add the structural representation of instances (e.g., by using
parse trees). These methods can use one kernel or a combination of kernels
(e.g., graph, sub-tree (ST), and shallow linguistic (SL)).

8
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

3
Neural Networks for Relation Extraction

Artiﬁcial neural networks have multiple diﬀerent architectures implementations
and variants. Often data representations are used as added sources of information
to perform text mining tasks, and ontologies may even be used as external sources
of information to enrich the model.

3.1
Architectures

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks are a parallel combination of small processing
units (nodes) which can acquire knowledge from the environment through a
learning process and store the knowledge in the connections between the nodes
[35] (represented by direct graphs [36]) (Fig. 3). The process is inspired by the
biological brain function, having each node correspond to a neuron and the
connections between the nodes representing the synapses.

h0
h1
h2
ht

A
B
C
D

x0

x1
x2
xt
...

Fig. 3. Architecture representation of an artiﬁcial neural networks model, where x0-t
represents the inputs and h0-t the respective outputs, for each module from A to D

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) is a type of artiﬁcial neural network
where the connections between the nodes are able to follow a temporal sequence.
This means that RNN can use their internal state, or memory, to process each
input sequence (Fig. 4). Deep learning techniques, such as RNN, aim to train
classiﬁcation models based on word embeddings, part-of-speech (POS) tagging,
and other features. RNN classiﬁers have multilayer architectures, where each
layer learns a diﬀerent representation of the input data. This characteristic makes
RNN classiﬁers ﬂexible for application to multiple text mining tasks, without
requiring task-speciﬁc feature engineering.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks are an alternative to regu-
lar RNN [10]. LSTMs are a type of RNN that handles long dependencies (e.g.,
sentences), making this classiﬁer more suitable for the biomedical domain, where

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
9

ht

h0
h1
h2
ht

A

A
A
A
A

xt
...

x0

x1
x2
xt

Fig. 4. Architecture representation of a recurrent neural networks model, where x0-t
represents the inputs and h0-t the respective outputs, for the repeating module A

sentences are usually long and descriptive (Fig. 5). In recent years, the use of
LSTMs to perform Relation Extraction (RE) tasks has become widespread in
various domains, such as semantic relations between nominals [37]. Bidirec-
tional LSTMs use two LSTM layers, at each step, one that reads the sentence
from right to left, and other that reads from left to right. The combined output
of both layers produces a ﬁnal score for each step. Bidirectional LSTMs has yield
better results than traditional LSTMs when applied to the same data-sets [38].

ht-1
ht
ht+1

l0
l1
l2
l3

A
A

xt-1

xt
xt+1

Fig. 5. Architecture representation of a long-short-term memory networks model,
where x0-t represents the inputs and h0-t the respective outputs, for the repeating
module A, where each repeating module has four interacting layers (l0-3)

3.2
Data Representations

The combination of multiple and diﬀerent language and entityrelated data rep-
resentations is vital for the success of neural network models dedicated to RE
tasks. Some of these features were already described in Subheading 2.1, such as
POS tagging and parse trees.

10
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

Shortest Dependency Path (SDP) is a feature that identiﬁes the words
between two entities mentioned in the text, concentrating the most relevant
information while decreasing noise [39].
Word Embeddings are ﬁxed-sized numerical vectors that aim to capture
the syntactic and semantic word relationships. These word vectors models use
multiple diﬀerent pretraining sources, for instance, Word2Vec [4] uses English
Wikipedia, and BERT [6] uses both English Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. Early
models, such as Word2Vec, learned one representation per word, but this proved
to be problematic due to polysemous and homonymous words. Recently, most
systems started to apply one embedding per word sense. One of the reasons
why BERT outperforms previous methods is because it uses contextual models,
meaning that it generates a unique representation for each word in a sentence.
For instance, in the sentences fragments, they got engaged, and students were
very engaged in, the word engaged for non-contextual models would have the
same meaning. BERT also outperforms other word vector models that take into
account the sentence context, such as ELMo [5] and ULMFit [40], due to being
an unsupervised and deeply bidirectional pre-trained language representation.
WordNet Hypernyms are a feature that helps to hierarchize entities, struc-
turing words similar to direct acyclic graphs [41]. For example, vegetable is a hy-
pernym of tubers, which in turn constitutes a hyponym of vegetable. This feature
is comparable to an ontology in the sense that a hierarchy relation is identiﬁed,
but is missing the identiﬁcation of the relations between the diﬀerent terms.
Using diﬀerent features as information sources feeding individual channels
leads to multichannel architecture models. Multichannel approaches were already
proven to be eﬀective in RE tasks [39].
Regarding biomedical RE, LSTMs were successful in identifying drug-drug in-
teractions [42], gene-mutation relations [43], drug-mutation relations [44], among
others. Some methods use domain-speciﬁc biomedical resources to train features
for biomedical tasks. BioBERT [45] is a domain speciﬁc language representation
model pre-trained on large-scale biomedical corpora, based on BERT [6] archi-
tecture. BioBERT, using minimal task-speciﬁc architecture modiﬁcations, signif-
icantly outperforms previous biomedical state-of-the-art models in the text min-
ing primary tasks of Named-Entity Recognition, Named-Entity Linking, and RE.
The BR-LSTM [46] model uses a multichannel approach with pre-trained med-
ical concept embeddings. Using the Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS)
concepts, BR-LSTM applies a medical concept embedding method developed by
Vine et al. [47]. BO-LSTM [48] uses the relations provided by domain-speciﬁc
ontologies to aid the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of relations between biomed-
ical entities in biomedical literature.

3.3
Ontologies

An ontology is a structured way of providing a common vocabulary in which
shared knowledge is represented [49]. Word embeddings can learn how to detect
relations between entities but manifest diﬃculties in grasping the semantics of
each entity and their speciﬁc domain. Domain-speciﬁc ontologies provide and

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
11

formalize this knowledge. Biomedical ontologies are usually structured as a di-
rected acyclic graph, where each node corresponds to an entity and the edges
correspond to known relations between those entities. Thus, a structured rep-
resentation of the semantics between entities and their relations, an ontology,
allows us to use it as an added feature to a machine learning classiﬁer. Some of
the biomedical entities structured in publicly available ontologies are genes prop-
erties/attributes (gene ontology (GO)), phenotypes (human phenotype ontology
(HPO)), diseases (disease ontology (DO)), and chemicals (chemical entities of
biological interest (ChEBI)). All of these entities participate in relations with dif-
ferent and same domain type entities. Hence, the information about each entity
on a semantic level adds a new layer of knowledge to increase the performance
of RE classiﬁers.
Non-biomedical models using ontologies as an added source of information to
neural networks is becoming widespread for several tasks. Li et al. [50] propose
using word sense deﬁnitions, provided by the WordNet ontology, to learn one em-
bedding per word sense for word sense disambiguation tasks. Ma et al. [51] focus
their work on semantic relations between ontologies and documents, using the
DBpedia ontology. Some researchers explored graph embedding techniques [52]
that convert relations to a low dimensional space which represents the structure
and properties of the graph. Other researchers have combined diﬀerent sources
of information, including ontological information, to do multi-label classiﬁcation
[53] and used ontology concepts to represent word tokens [54].
However, few authors have used biomedical ontologies to perform RE. Text-
presso [55] is a text-mining system that works as a search engine of individual
sentences, acquired from the full text of scientiﬁc articles, and articles them-
selves. It integrates biomedical ontological information (e.g., of genes, pheno-
types, and proteins) allowing for article and sentence search query by term. The
integration of the ontological information allows for semantic queries. This sys-
tem helps database curation by automatically extracting biomedical relations.
The IICE [56] system uses kernel-based support vector machines along with an
ensemble classiﬁer to identify and classify drugdrug interactions, linking each
chemical compound to the ChEBI ontology. Tripodi et al. [57] system focus on
druggene/protein interaction discovery to aid database curation, making use of
ChEBI and GO ontologies. BO-LSTM [48] is the only model until now that
incorporates ancestry information from biomedical ontologies with deep learn-
ing to extract relations from the text, speciﬁcally drugdrug interactions and
genephenotype relations.

4
Evaluation Measures

The evaluation of machine learning systems is done by applying the trained
models to a gold standard test-set, manually curated or annotated by domain
experts and unseen by the system. For a Relation Extraction (RE) task, the
gold standard test-set should correspond to the list of pairs of entities (e.g.,

12
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

phenotypegene or genedisease pairs) that co-occur in the same sentences and
their relation (Known or Unknown).
To any given information extraction system it is necessary to deﬁne what con-
stitutes a positive and negative result. In RE tasks the types of results possible
are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Types of results obtained with an information extraction system for a RE
task

Annotator (Gold Standard)
System
Classiﬁcation

Relation
Relation
True Positive (TP)
No Relation False Negative (FN)

No Relation
Relation
False Positive (FP)
No Relation True Negative (TN)

The primary goal of a given information retrieval system is to maximize the
number of TP (True Positives) and TN (True Negatives). To compare results
obtained with diﬀerent data-sets or diﬀerent tools we have three distinct eval-
uation metrics: recall, precision and F-measure. Precision represents how often
the results are correct, recall is the number of correct results identiﬁed and F-
measure is a combination of both metrics that expresses overall performance,
being the harmonic mean of precision and recall:

Recall =
T P
T P + F N
P recision =
T P
T P + F P
F −measure = 2 × P recision × Recall

P recision + Recall
(1)

The performance of the most recent systems dedicated to biomedical RE,
described in Subheading 3.2, is shown in Table 2. These systems are not compa-
rable, since each system is focused on the relations between diﬀerent biomedical
entities, and even addresses more than binary relations, such as the Graph LSTM
(GOLD) system.

Table 2. Biomedical RE systems current performance

System
Precision Recall F-Measure

DLSTM [42]
0.7253
0.7149
0.7200

Graph LSTM (GOLD) [43]
0.4330
0.3050
0.3580

BioBERT [45]
0.8582
0.8640
0.8604

BR-LSTM [46]
0.7152
0.7079
0.7115

BO-LSTM [48]
0.6572
0.8184
0.7290

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
13

For RE tasks a human acceptable performance is usually around 85/90%
in F-measure [58]. To facilitate the creation of gold standards we should strive
for semi-automation, that is, employ automatic methods for corpora annotation
(creating silver standard corpora), and then correct those annotations using
domain-speciﬁc curators.

5
Conclusions

The way we communicate scientiﬁc knowledge is through scientiﬁc literature.
At the current rate of document growth, the only way to process this amount
of information is by using computational methods. The information obtained
through these methods can lead to a better understanding of biological systems.
When creating biomedical text mining systems, it is essential to take into account
the speciﬁc characteristics of biomedical literature. Biological information follows
diﬀerent nomenclatures and levels of sentence complexity.
Automatic biomedical Relation Extraction (RE) still has a long way to go
to achieve human-level performance scores. Over recent years, some innovative
systems have successively achieved better results by making use of multiple
knowledge sources and data representations. These systems not only rely on the
training data but make use of diﬀerent language and entity-related features, to
create models that identify relations in highly heterogeneous text. This chapter
described the evolution of dedicated RE systems, up until neural networks. Neu-
ral networks, especially deep neural networks, which make use of multichannel
architectures are composed of multiple features. Each system integrates diﬀerent
features distinctively. An optimal combination of features and the ideal features
to perform biomedical RE tasks are still far from human level performance.
The knowledge encoded in biomedical ontologies plays a vital part in the
development of deep neural networks systems, providing semantic and ancestry
information for entities, such as genes, proteins, phenotypes, and diseases. One
could also add semantic similarity measures as an additional information layer.
Also, to accompany the growth of systems targeting diﬀerent biomedical rela-
tions, there is a growing need for more domain-speciﬁc corpora, that can only
be accomplished by automated corpus creation (silver standard corpora) [59].
Integrating diﬀerent knowledge sources instead of relying solely on the train-
ing data for creating classiﬁcation models will allow us not only to ﬁnd relevant
information for a particular problem quicker, but also to validate the results of
recent research, and propose new experimental hypotheses.

References

1. Hearst MA (1999) Untangling text data mining. Paper presented at the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, College Park,
Maryland, 2026 June 1999.
2. PubMed (1996) United States National Library of Medicine.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/. Accessed 05 Apr 2019

14
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

3. Lamurias A, Couto F (2019) Text mining for bioinformatics using biomedical liter-
ature. In: Ranganathan S, Nakai K, Schnbach C, Gribskov M (eds) Encyclopedia
of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, vol 1. Elsevier, Oxford, pp 602-611.

4. Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado GS, Dean J (2013) Distributed Rep-
resentations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. Paper presented
at the 26th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
Lake Tahoe, Nevada, 05-10 December 2013
5. Peters M, Neumann M, Iyyer M, Gardner M, Clark C, Lee K, Zettlemoyer L
(2018) Deep Contextualized Word Representations. In: Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, New Orleans, Louisiana, 01-06 June
2018
6. Devlin J, Chang M, Lee K, Toutanova K (2018) BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidi-
rectional Transformers for Language Understanding. In: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 06-07 June 2019
7. Radford A, Narasimhan K, Salimans T, Sutskever I (2018) Improving Language
Understanding by Generative Pre-Training. OpenAI.
language-unsupervised. Accessed 02 May 2019
8. Dai Z, Yang Z, Yang Y, Carbonell JG, Le QV, Salakhutdinov RR (2019)
Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context.
CoRR, abs/1901.02860
9. Radford A, Jeﬀrey W, Child R, Luan D, Amodei D, Sutskever I (2019) Lan-
guage Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI.
com/blog/better-language-models/. Accessed 02 May 2019
10. Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computa-
tion 9:1735-1780.
11. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis
A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G
(2000) Gene Ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nature Genetics 25:25-
29.
12. Hastings J, Owen G, Dekker A, Ennis M, Kale N, Muthukrishnan V, Turner S,
Swainston N, Mendes P, Steinbeck C (2016) ChEBI in 2016: Improved services and
an expanding collection of metabolites. Nucleic Acids Res D1(44):D1214-D1219.

13. Robinson PN, Mundlos S (2010) The human phenotype ontology. Clinical genetics
77(6):525-34.
14. Luo Y, Uzuner , Szolovits P (2017) Bridging semantics and syntax with graph
algorithms-state-of-the-art of extracting biomedical relations. Brieﬁngs in Bioin-
formatics 18(1):160178.
15. Sennrich R, Haddow B, Birch A (2016) Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words
with Subword Units. CoRR, abs/1508.07909
16. Manning CD, Raghavan P, Schtze H (2008) Introduction to Information Retrieval.
Cambridge University Press, New York
17. Aho AV, Sethi R, Ullman JD (1986) Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools.
Addison Wesley, Boston

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
15

18. Westergaard D, Strfeldt HH, Tnsberg C, Jensen LJ, Brunak S (2018) A compre-
hensive and quantitative comparison of text-mining in 15 million full-text arti-
cles versus their corresponding abstracts. PLOS Computational Biology 14:116.

19. Fleuren WWM and Alkema W (2015) Application of text mining in the biomedical
domain. Methods 74:97106.
20. Singhal A, Simmons M, Lu Z (2016) Text mining genotype-phenotype relationships
from biomedical literature for database curation and precision medicine. PLoS
Computational Biology 12(11):e1005017.
pcbi.1005017
21. Alves CH, Wijnholds J (2018) AAV Gene Augmentation Therapy for CRB1-
Associated Retinitis Pigmentosa. In: Boon C., Wijnholds J. (eds) Retinal Gene
Therapy. Methods in Molecular Biology, vol 1715. Humana Press, New York, NY
22. Lamurias A, Clarke LA, Couto FM (2017) Extracting microRNA-gene relations
from biomedical literature using distant supervision. PLoS One 12(3):e0171929.

23. Zweigenbaum P, Demner-Fushman D, Yu H, Cohen KB (2007) Frontiers of
biomedical text mining: current progress. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics 8(5):358-75.

24. Bunescu R, Mooney R, Ramani A, Marcotte, E (2006) Integrating co-occurrence
statistics with information extraction for robust retrieval of protein interactions
from MEDLINE. In: Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL BioNLP Workshop on Link-
ing Natural Language and Biology, New York, NY, 8 June 2006
25. Zhou D, He Y, Kwoh CK (2008) From Biomedical Literature to Knowledge: Min-
ing Protein-Protein Interactions. In: Smolinski TG, Milanova MG, Hassanien AE
(eds) Computational Intelligence in Biomedicine and Bioinformatics. Studies in
Computational Intelligence, vol 151. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
26. Hao Y, Zhu X, Huang M, Li M (2005) Discovering patterns to extract protein-
protein interactions from the literature: Part II. Bioinformatics 21(15):32943300.

27. Wang HC, Chen YH, Kao HY, Tsai SJ (2011) Inference of transcriptional reg-
ulatory network by bootstrapping patterns. Bioinformatics 27:1422-8.73.
//doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr155
28. Liu H, Komandur R, Verspoor K (2011) From Graphs to Events : A Subgraph
Matching Approach for Information Extraction from Biomedical Text. In: Pro-
ceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011
29. Nguyen QL, Tikk D, Leser U (2010) Simple tricks for improving pattern-based
information extraction from the biomedical literature. Journal of Biomedical Se-
mantics 1(1):9.
30. Koike A, Niwa Y, Takagi T (2005) Automatic extraction of gene/protein biological
functions from biomedical text. Bioinformatics 21:1227-36.
1093/bioinformatics/bti084
31. Rinaldi F, Schneider G, Kaljurand K, Hess M, Andronis C, Konstandi O, Persidis
A (2007) Mining of relations between proteins over biomedical scientiﬁc litera-
ture using a deep-linguistic approach. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 39:127-36.

32. Xu Y, Hong K, Tsujii J, Chang E I-C (2014) Feature engineering combined
with machine learning and rule-based methods for structured information ex-
traction from narrative clinical discharge summaries. Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association 19(5):824832.
amiajnl-2011-000776

16
Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction

33. Kim MY (2008) Detection of gene interactions based on syntactic relations. Journal
of Biomedicine & Biotechnology 2008:371710.
371710
34. Giuliano C, Lavelli A, Romano L (2006) Exploiting Shallow Linguistic Informa-
tion for Relation Extraction from Biomedical Literature. In: Proceedings of the
11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Trento, Italy, 03-07 April 2006
35. HayKin S (1998) Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. Prentice Hall
PTR, New Jersey
36. Guresen E, Kayakutlu G (2011) Deﬁnition of artiﬁcial neural networks with
comparison to other networks. Procedia Computer Science 3:426-433.
//doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2010.12.071
37. Miwa M, Bansal M (2016) End-to-end Relation Extraction using LSTMs on Se-
quences and Tree Structures. In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Berlin, Germany, 07-12 August 2016
38. Zhang S, Zheng D, Hu X, Yang M (2015) Bidirectional long short-term memory
networks for relation classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 29th Paciﬁc Asia Con-
ference on Language, Information and Computation, 30 October - 01 November
2015
39. Xu Y, Mou L, Li G, Chen Y (2015) Classifying Relations via Long Short Term
Memory Networks along Shortest Dependency Paths. In: Proceedings of Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Lisbon, Portugal,
17-21 September 2015
40. Howard J, Ruder S (2018) Universal Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classi-
ﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Melbourne, Australia, 15-20 July 2018
41. Christiane Fellbaum (ed) (1998) WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. The
MIT Press, Cambridge
42. Wang W, Yang X, Yang C, Guo X, Zhang X, Wu C (2017) Dependency-based long
short term memory network for drug-drug interaction extraction. BMC Bioinfor-
matics 18(16):578.
43. Song L, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Gildea D (2018) N-ary Relation Extraction using Graph-
State LSTM. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, 31 October - 04 November 2018
44. Peng N, Poon H, Quirk C, Toutanova K, Yih W (2017) Cross-Sentence N-ary
Relation Extraction with Graph LSTMs. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics 5:101-115.
45. Lee J, Yoon W, Kim S, Kim D, Kim S, So C-H, Kang J (2020) BioBERT: a
pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text min-
ing. Bioinformatics 36(4):1234-1240.
btz682
46. Xu B, Shi X, Zhao Z, Zheng W (2018) Leveraging Biomedical Resources in Bi-
LSTM for Drug-Drug Interaction Extraction. IEEE Access 6:33432-33439.
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2845840
47. Vine LD, Zuccon G, Koopman B, Sitbon L, Bruza P (2014) Medical Semantic
Similarity with a Neural Language Model. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Inter-
national Conference on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
CIKM, Shanghai, China, 03-07 November 2014
48. Lamurias A, Sousa D, Clarke LA, Couto FM (2019) BO-LSTM: classifying re-
lations via long short-term memory networks along biomedical ontologies. BMC
Bioinformatics 20:10.

Neural Networks for Biomedical Relation Extraction
17

49. Gruber TR (1993) A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁcations.
Knowledge Acquisition 5(2):199220.
50. Li Q, Li T, Chang B (2016) Learning word sense embeddings from word sense
deﬁnitions. In: Lin C-Y, Xue N, Zhao D, Huang X, Feng Y (eds) Natural Language
Understanding and Intelligent Applications, vol 10102. Springer, Cham, pp 22435
51. Ma N, B H-tZ, Xiao X (2017) An Ontology-Based Latent Semantic Index-
ing Approach Using Long Short-Term Memory Networks. Web and Big Data
10366(2):18599.
52. Goyal P, Ferrara E (2018) Graph embedding techniques, applications, and per-
formance: A survey. Knowledge-Based Systems 151:78-94.
1016/j.knosys.2018.03.022
53. Kong X, Cao B, Yu PS (2013) Multi-label classiﬁcation by mining label and in-
stance correlations from heterogeneous information networks. In: Proceedings of
the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, Chicago, Illinois, 11-14 August 2013
54. Dasigi P, Ammar W, Dyer C, Hovy E (2017) Ontology-aware token embeddings
for prepositional phrase attachment. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 30 July - 04
August 2017
55. Mller HM, Kenny EE, Sternberg PW (2004) Textpresso: An Ontology-Based Infor-
mation Retrieval and Extraction System for Biological Literature. PLOS Biology
2(11):e309.
56. Lamurias A, Ferreira JD, Couto FM (2014) Identifying interactions between chem-
ical entities in biomedical text. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics 11(3):116.

57. Tripodi I, Boguslav M, Haylu N, Hunter LE (2017) Knowledge-base-enriched re-
lation extraction. In: Proceedings of the Sixth BioCreative Challenge Evaluation
Workshop, Bethesda, Maryland, 18-20 October 2017
58. Aroyo L, Welty CA (2015) Truth Is a Lie: Crowd Truth and the Seven Myths
of Human Annotation. AI Magazine 36:15-24.
v36i1.2564
59. Sousa D, Lamurias A, Couto FM (2019) A Silver Standard Corpus of Human
Phenotype-Gene Relations. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), Minneapolis, Minnesota,
06-07 June 2019