ZPD Teaching Strategies for Deep Reinforcement
Learning from Demonstrations

Daniel Seita, David Chan, Roshan Rao, Chen Tang, Mandi Zhao, John Canny
University of California, Berkeley

arXiv:1910.12154v1 [cs.LG] 26 Oct 2019

Abstract

Learning from demonstrations is a popular tool for accelerating and reducing
the exploration requirements of reinforcement learning. When providing expert
demonstrations to human students, we know that the demonstrations must fall
within a particular range of difﬁculties called the “Zone of Proximal Development
(ZPD)” [6, 33]. If they are too easy the student learns nothing, but if they are too
difﬁcult the student is unable to follow along. This raises the question: Given
a set of potential demonstrators, which among them is best suited for teaching
any particular learner? Prior work, such as the popular Deep Q-learning from
Demonstrations (DQfD) algorithm has generally focused on single demonstrators.
In this work we consider the problem of choosing among multiple demonstrators
of varying skill levels. Our results align with intuition from human learners: it
is not always the best policy to draw demonstrations from the best performing
demonstrator (in terms of reward). We show that careful selection of teaching
strategies can result in sample efﬁciency gains in the learner’s environment across
nine Atari games.

1
Introduction

When a child follows an adult teaching by example, we want the child to gradually develop skills
without assistance. Intuitively, an effective teaching method might provide examples that are within a
“comfort zone” for the student — just difﬁcult enough to learn from, but not so difﬁcult that the student
cannot beneﬁt from the teaching. This intuition is formalized in “Zone of Proximal Development
(ZPD)” theory, an epistemological theory built on a human cognitive model ﬁrst proposed by social
psychologist Lev Vygotsky [6, 33]. According to ZPD theory, learning examples are placed on a
spectrum with problems that a learner can solve on their own on one side, and problems a learner
cannot solve on the other. According to Vygotsky, when presenting a student with examples, those
examples must be “in the Zone of Proximal Development,” a set of problems which are difﬁcult for
the learner to solve alone, but can be solved with guidance.

In the proposed work, we investigate the application of ZPD in deep reinforcement learning contexts
where a learner agent has access to several teacher agents or demonstrators. The primary question we
explore is the following: which among a given set of teachers should the agent “select” to best improve
learning? While there has been substantial work on reinforcement learning with demonstrators (e.g.,
DQfD [11] and DDPGfD [31]), to our knowledge there is no work investigating which among a set
of teachers should be selected for teaching. We focus on off-policy Deep Q-learning algorithms with
experience replay [17] to act both as teacher agents, and as a student agent. We evaluate on nine Atari
2600 benchmarks [2]. Our contributions include:

1. A ZPD-based algorithm that allows for dynamic selection of teachers for a given student
agent.

2. Results showing that choosing the appropriate teaching strategy, which may not always be a
single teacher, improves sample efﬁciency and may improve ﬁnal reward.

2
Related Work

We focus on applying ZPD concepts in off-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithms with
experience replay, which allows sharing of samples between learners and teachers. Prominent
examples of (deep) off-policy algorithms include the seminal Deep Q-Network (DQN) [19] and its
notable extensions, such as Double DQN [30] which we employ in this work. Other improvements are
accounted for in algorithms such as Rainbow [10] which combined multiple algorithmic components
and showed complementary beneﬁts. For simplicity, we use Double DQN (DDQN) as the base
algorithm, but the algorithm we propose is broadly applicable to any off-policy, experience replay
based agent.

Despite various advances in deep reinforcement learning, sample efﬁciency and exploration remain
known challenges. A common ingredient to improve sample efﬁciency is using a demonstrator
(equivalently in this work, a teacher). DAgger [24] is a popular approach, but requires a teacher
to be continually present to label student-generated states with actions. Arguably a more practical
alternative is to assume a ﬁxed batch of data from (potentially multiple) demonstrators, without
requiring any further teacher interaction, and to see how much an agent can learn from the data.
If the agent does not do any environment interaction, the setting is known as batch reinforcement
learning [8, 1, 15].

We similarly focus on off-policy learning with demonstrations, but allow the agent to take environment
steps in addition to using demonstrator samples for learning. A prominent example of this for discrete
control is Deep Q-learning from Demonstrations (DQfD) [11], the most relevant prior work, which
seeded a learner agent with a small batch of human demonstrator data and showed performance gains
on Atari games. Follow-up work, including Ape-X DQfD [23, 13] and R2D3 [21] scaled the idea to
handle a larger stream of samples and a wider variety of environments. In continuous control several
algorithms have built upon the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) [16] algorithm such as
in [31, 20, 32] to effectively leverage demonstrations for sparse reward tasks. Schmitt et al. [28] apply
a similar idea in the actor-critic setting by adding an auxiliary cross-entropy loss function from [25]
to encourage learner policies to be closer to a teacher’s policy, and additionally consider an ensemble
of teachers specialized to different tasks. None of these prior works, though, primarily focuses on
determining which among a set of teachers we should select for using samples.

The problem setting we consider can more generally be viewed as that of using a neural network
teacher to accelerate the training of a neural network student. One of the most straightforward
methods is to train a student model so that its ﬁnal layer matches that of the teacher network. This is
known as distillation and has been applied in classiﬁcation [12, 9] and reinforcement learning [25] to
decrease the size of neural networks and to improve task generalization. The method we propose
is distinct but complementary to distillation. We focus on teaching via samples in a shared replay
environment rather than matching ﬁnal neural network layers, but the method of selecting appropriate
teachers could be used for distillation based approaches, forming a curriculum [3] over teachers.

3
Methods

In a setup mirroring DQfD [11], we train student agents using DDQN [30] as the base algorithm,
where training is based on a mixture of self-generated on-policy data and off-policy data from a
teacher. Unlike in DQfD, we update the distribution of teacher data according to a “teaching strategy”
fselect which draws experience from different teachers depending on the performance of the student.
This teacher experience is blended in a mini-batch with student experience according to a second
function fblend. This differs from the classical literature in that the teacher experience now comes
from a dynamic distribution instead of a ﬁxed distribution drawn from the best performing teacher
agent. An outline of the method is given in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 The Student-Teacher Framework

1: Input: A set of data from teacher snapshots, {DT1, . . . , DTN } corresponding to the teacher’s
training run, student policy πθ, student replay buffer DS, gradient update frequency u.
2: TZPD := fselect(πθ)
3: for steps t ∈{1, 2, . . .} do
4:
Take an environment step using πθ, store resulting sample in DS
5:
if t mod u = 0 then
6:
Dminibatch := fblend(DTZPD, DS)
7:
Compute gradient update with Dminibatch
8:
TZPD := fselect(πθ)
9:
end if
10: end for

3.1
Background

We use the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation for reinforcement learning [29].
An MDP consists of a ﬁve-tuple (S, A, P, R, γ) where at each time step t, the agent is at a state
st ∈S from the set of possible states. For our benchmark Atari environments, the states are of
dimensions R84×84×4, and represent gray-scale environment images, consisting of four frames. The
agent takes a (discrete) action at ∈A from the set of possible actions, which in the Atari environments
are game dependent. The environment dynamics map the state-action pair into a successor state
st+1 ∼P(·|st, at), and the agent receives a scalar reward signal rt = R(st, at). The objective
is to ﬁnd a policy π : S →A that maximizes the expected discounted return E[P∞
t=0 γtrt] with
γ ∈(0, 1].

3.2
The Student and Teacher Agents

We consider the RL framework with student, S, and teacher, T, agents and denote policies as πψ
with parameters ψ, which could represent either the student or the teacher. In our experiments we use
the same neural network architecture for S and T, but this is not an assumption of the method, which
treats the teacher as a black-box demonstrator.

In this paper we use a set of snapshots of a standard DDQN [30] agent pre-trained on the benchmark
environment to serve as teachers. The teacher training uses the following loss function JT for a given
sample (s, a, r, s′) to adjust its Q-network Q:

JT (Q) =

R(s, a) + γQ(s′, a′
max; ψ′) −Q(s, a, ; ψ′)
2
(1)

where a′
max = arg maxa∈A Q(s′, a; ψ), and ψ and ψ′ are parameters of the current and target
networks, respectively.

In the proposed algorithm, S can draw samples from both self-generated environment data, and from
the teacher T. We train the student with a modiﬁed DDQN loss to account for the off-policy teacher
samples which are injected into the student’s replay buffer. The modiﬁed loss is the sum:
JS(Q) = JT (Q) + λEJE(Q) + λ2JL2(Q)
(2)
where JE(Q) is the additional large margin classiﬁcation loss [22], as used by DQfD [11]:

h
Q(s, a) + ℓ(aE, a)
i
−Q(s, aE)
(3)

JE(Q) = max
a∈A

and JL2(Q) is an L2 weight regularization of the Q-network. The λE and λ2 are hyper-parameters
controlling a trade-off between these loss values.

While we have designed the DDQN agents to closely model the original DQfD paper [11], our
implementation differs in two major ways:

• We do not use the pre-training phase from DQfD in order to improve the generality of our
results, and to explore training agents de novo.
• We do not use prioritization of the replay buffer [27] in any form in order to closely examine
the effect of having a ﬁxed minibatch sampling ratio (discussed in Section 3.4) on the
performance of the model.

While it is possible to use an ensemble of fully trained teacher agents as teachers, we instead draw
our teachers from a set of snapshots generated during the training of a single teacher DDQN network
T. During the teacher training, we store snapshots of its parameters at regular time intervals with
respect to environment steps. This results in a set of N saved snapshots {T1, . . . , TN} from the
training history of T, each corresponding to a different policy. For the k-th teacher policy πTk
from the training history, we denote a dataset of m states (induced by running the policy πTk in the
environment) as

DTk = {sk
0, sk
1, . . . , sk
m} ∼πTk.
(4)

To make results more reproducible and to facilitate comparisons among different teaching methods,
we take DTk to be a set of samples that the teacher agent experienced in a window around the time
that the snapshot was saved.

3.3
Student/Teacher Matching with fselect

The ZPD teacher selection function fselect is a critical feature of Algorithm 1. This function
determines the distribution across teachers from which we sample experience. In our experiments,
we draw only from a delta distribution across the teachers, and refer to the selected teacher as the
ZPD teacher TZPD. We leave exploring prioritized sampling across multiple teachers to future work.

We propose deﬁning fselect as a “ﬁxed snapshots ahead” strategy, with an integer hyperparameter
k. For any student S, that student is matched to a snapshot Tmatch, the teacher with the reward
closest to the one that the student achieves. We refer to the snapshot Tmatch as the “matched” teacher
snapshot. The fselect function sets the ZPD teacher (the snapshot from which experience is drawn)
to be snapshot Tmatch+k, capped at the last snapshot if it exceeds the total number of snapshots.
Intuitively, the currently matched snapshot tells us the teacher snapshot that is roughly on par with
the student, and so the next ZPD snapshot may be some ﬁxed interval ahead, with higher rewards
indicating that we are using teachers that are more skilled at a given task. Another interpretation
of this matching function is as a curriculum [3] where the learner initially starts with a teacher that
provides “easier” samples, before moving on to harder teachers.

While it is possible that updating the ZPD teacher at each time-step would provide the best perfor-
mance, for efﬁciency, we update the ZPD teacher infrequently. A call to fselect triggers when the
student’s average reward (over a window of 100 episodes) exceeds that of the matched teacher’s
reward, the latter of which is the average over a window of 100 episodes the teacher experienced at
the time the snapshot was saved.

In this work, we examine ﬁxed snapshot ahead strategies for k ∈{0, 2, 5, 10} and call these “k ahead”
methods. We additionally test with two baselines: a “best ahead” where the ZPD snapshot is ﬁxed
throughout student training to be the teacher snapshot with highest reward, and a “random ahead”
where the next ZPD snapshot is chosen at random among the set of all teacher snapshots with higher
reward than the student.

3.4
Minibatch Sampling with fblend

Once a ZPD teacher, TZPD, is selected, we can treat the corresponding dataset DTZPD of samples as a
distinct “ZPD teacher” replay buffer. We then sample from both DS and DTZPD in each minibatch
update of the DQfD algorithm. When sampling, however, we need to decide how many samples to
draw from the teacher’s replay buffer (off-policy examples) and how many to draw from the replay
buffer of the student (on-policy examples). This trade-off is made according to the strategy fblend,
a binomial distribution representing the probability that a sample in the minibatch is drawn from a
particular replay buffer.

In this work, we use a ﬁxed ratio of student-teacher samples per mini-batch. While prior work has
tested using a ratio of 25% teacher samples in a minibatch as in Ape-X DQfD [23] or even smaller
ratios of 1/256 as in R2D3 [21], we use a 50% ratio to test the effect of using more off-policy teacher
data per minibatch. These ratios are held constant throughout student training, up to the point when
the student surpasses every teacher snapshot. When this occurs, we anneal fblend, in a linear decay
towards no teacher samples. At this point, the student has little to learn from the teachers.

Figure 1:
Learning curves for all nine games tested, comparing: 10 ahead, best ahead, and the
original DDQN teacher. For 10 ahead and best ahead, we test with both a 4:1 and a 2:1 ratio of
steps:updates, as discussed in Section 4. Learning curves are over two random seeds. Results suggest
that the 2:1 throughput case is at or exceeds the level of the 4:1 case across games.

Table 1: Hyperparameters used when training teachers and then students. In addition to values listed
here, both the student and teachers used an Adam [14] learning rate of 10−4, batch size 32, target
network sync-ing period of 10,000 steps, and discount factor γ = 0.99.

Hyperparameter
Teacher
Student
Environment steps
6,000,000
6,000,000
Replay buffer size
1,000,000
250,000
Steps between gradient updates
4
2
Student-teacher minibatch ratio
N/A
50-50
L2 regularization weight λL2
N/A
10−5

Supervised loss weight λE
N/A
10−1 or 10−2

Supervised loss margin ℓ
N/A
0.8
Size of ZPD teacher buffer DTZPD
N/A
≈250000

4
Experimental Setup

We evaluate our methods using the Atari [2] benchmarks for the following nine games: Alien,
BeamRider, Boxing, Breakout, Pong, Qbert, Robotank, Seaquest, and SpaceInvaders. These include
several widely-used games (Pong and Breakout in particular) and others for which DDQN can
get reasonable performance. We run into a limitation for complex games with sparse rewards,
such as Montezuma’s Revenge and Private Eye. For those games, training a teacher agent via
deep reinforcement learning is famously difﬁcult, and successful learning normally requires some
combination of human demonstrators, the underlying game state, or advanced exploration strategies
with massively parallel data collection [26, 5]. Since we compare performance of students versus
teachers, we wish to have teachers follow the same base algorithm of DDQN, so we did not test on
games for which DDQN performs extremely poorly.

For all teacher DDQN training runs, we saved 23 snapshots, spaced out over 250,000 environment
training steps out of the 6 million total steps taken, where each environment step is exactly 4 frames,
following OpenAI gym [4] conventions. The ﬁrst teacher snapshot was saved at 400,000 steps, the
second at 750,000 steps, and continued until the 23rd at 5,900,000 steps. We use 30 random no-op
actions to begin each environment. For each teacher selection method, we benchmark with two
random seeds and average the results.

We test the following six fselect methods: 0 ahead, 2 ahead, 5 ahead, 10 ahead, best ahead, and
random ahead (discussed in Section 3.3). For the DQfD lambda hyperparameter λE, which controls
the strength of the imitation loss, we tuned values in {0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0} for all nine games with
the 0.8 large margin loss from [11]. In contrast to their work, we found that λE = 1.0 was too large
and resulted in deﬁcient student performance, perhaps because we use relatively more off-policy data.
Based on initial tuning, six games worked best with λ = 0.1 and the other three (BeamRider, Pong,
Robotank) worked best with λ = 0.01. Our main hyperparameters are shown in Table 1, where we
borrow some relevant hyperparameters from DQfD [11] to minimize tuning, and reduce the size of
the experience replay buffer [34].

We also tuned the number of environment steps taken by the student in between gradient updates.
The standard in DQN is to use 4 environment steps for every gradient update. With 50% of the
minibatch coming from demonstrator samples, doing a 4:1 step:update ratio means that each new
student environment step sample is consumed, in expectation, half as many times as in the no-teacher
case. A 2:1 ratio allows the student to use environment samples at the same rate, and to consume
teacher samples at twice the rate. We thus tested both 4:1 and 2:1 ratios across all games and teaching
methods. Figure 1 shows a representative set of results, suggesting that students trained with a 2:1
ratio outperform those with a 4:1 ratio. Thus, for all results we use a 2:1 ratio, and leave examining
the step-to-update ratio for “student throughput” to future work.

5
Results

Figure 2 plots the learning curves, averaged over two random seeds, for all nine games and all
teaching strategies tested. Traditional methods such as DQfD rely on the best ahead style of teaching
— they choose a constant teacher achieving the highest ﬁnal reward. We can see that by dynamically
altering the teaching strategy, in almost all cases the best ahead strategy is sub-optimal with respect
to both ﬁnal reward and sample efﬁciency. Table 2 summarizes this observation.

The learning curves and tables suggest that the strongest teaching methods are the random ahead, 5
ahead, and 10 ahead methods. This result not only supports our overall hypothesis that a dynamic
ZPD style strategy can improve performance, but also indicates that it may not be necessary to use
the very highest-rewarding expert available in all circumstances. One possible explanation for these
results is that with high-quality samples from the teacher with highest reward, running a DQfD-style
algorithm may overﬁt to that teacher’s samples (as overﬁtting has been shown in deep Q-learning [7]).
Also intriguing is the performance of the random ahead method. The diversity of samples introduced
by the method could aid in avoiding overﬁtting to a given teacher or a given skill range. We believe
that it is interesting future work to further explore these random teaching methods, as additional
exploration could yield insights into the learning process of Deep Q Networks.

Another clear result is that, as expected, the best teaching methods for a particular game outperform
the teacher itself. This is despite the 50-50 minibatch ratio, which uses a relatively large amount
of off-policy data as compared to DQfD [11], Ape-X DQfD [23], and especially R2D3 [21], which
complicates learning as Q-learning algorithms normally need signiﬁcant on-policy experience [8].

Table 2: A ranking of the various methods across the nine games, combining all trials from Figure 2.
We indicate the number of times the method “won”, i.e., had highest reward (over two random seeds)
for a given game.

Method
BA
RA
0A
2A
5A
10A
Average
0
2
0
0
3
4
Last 100
1
3
1
0
3
1

5.1
Per-Game Analysis

The results indicate that the best strategy for making use of teacher samples appears to be game-
dependent. From Table 2, the best ahead method is only highest in one case, Pong, when considering
the average of the last 100 episodes. The learning curves indicate Pong is unique: all teaching
methods, with the exception of 0 ahead, have near identical performance. This phenomenon is
surprising when considering that, for example, the 2 ahead method will initially query samples from
a ZPD teacher that attains roughly -17 reward. Episodic rewards for Pong range from -21 to 21, so
this suggests that using samples from teachers with low game rewards can nonetheless be beneﬁcial.

Breakout is another interesting case study. The learning curves suggest that the best ahead and the
10 ahead strategies are the two weakest strategies for the learner. One hypothesis for why Breakout
may be better suited to a shorter ZPD “advancement interval” is because more advanced agents are
frequently in states that might not be beneﬁcial to a learner. Upon observing trained teacher DDQN
policies, we noticed that they often got stuck in an endless cycle of hitting the ball back and forth in
the same pattern in an effort to get the last few remaining bricks. Figure 3 shows a representative
example from Breakout. Advanced agents are frequently in complex states, which intuitively might
not be as helpful to beginning learners. Thus, for faster learning, it may initially make more sense to
use samples from a a slightly weaker agent.

Figure 2: Results for fselect methods as described in Section 3.3 on the nine Atari games we use.
Learning curves represent the average reward over a window of 100 past episodes as a function of
environment steps (six million total) as suggested in [18]. Curves are then re-averaged over two
random seeds per fselect function. Each seed for a game is run with the same teacher and the same
set of datasets generated from that teacher to reduce the variability in results. The black dashed lines
represent the performance of the DDQN teacher agent, run only once per game. Results suggest that
using the best ahead matching, indicated in bright gold above, is not the clear best choice for any of
the games tested.

Other interesting results come from Robotank and Seaquest. While results suggest that using any
of the selection functions results in improvements over a teacher (which may in large part be due
to more frequent gradient updates), there exists a wide range in performance among the selection
methods. Thus, careful tuning may be beneﬁcial, and it would be interesting to see the effects of
teaching methods when training for more environment steps.

Figure 4 provides some intuition on the matching process for various fselect methods. The ﬁgure
shows, for the same Space Invaders teacher, reward curves for the student under a representative
best ahead, 5 ahead, and random ahead training run. We can see that the best ahead method uses the
same ZPD teacher with reward 1007.5. The 5 ahead method starts with a ZPD teacher at reward 600
and then gradually the reward increases to the reward of the ﬁnal snapshot. The ZPD reward is not
monotonically increasing because it is not generally the case that reward always increases throughout
the 23 saved snapshots.

Figure 3: A representative example of a set of Breakout frames that an expert agent frequently
encounters. Here, the agent moves back and forth repeatedly in the same pattern and the ball does
not hit any remaining bricks. The game only exits this “deadlock” due to either the 1% chance of a
random action from the epsilon greedy policy or the 10K episode step limit.

Figure 4:
Examples of learner reward curves and corresponding ZPD reward values for Space
Invaders for fselect functions: best ahead (left), 5 ahead (middle), and random ahead (right). The
plots only show the curves for the period when the learner has lower reward than its ZPD teacher. At
an environment step, the reward of the learner and the reward of its ZPD teacher is plotted, showing
that the best ahead method always uses a ZPD teacher with the highest possible reward, while the
random method uses ZPD teachers with varying reward levels (that exceed the reward of the learner).

It is interesting to see in Figure 4 that the random ahead strategy experiences a more diverse reward
range from its ZPD teachers. We believe that investigating this phenomenon in future work is
important; can we understand and quantify the beneﬁt one gets from randomizing a teacher?

6
Concluding Remarks

In this work, we have proposed an approach that merges the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD)
theory from psychology with modern deep reinforcement learning practices. We demonstrated an
algorithm for determining which of several teachers should be selected to provide samples for a
learner, and demonstrated results on Atari environments suggesting that it is not ideal to solely rely
on the highest-reward teacher.

In this work we also raise a number of interesting questions for consideration in future work. For
example, can we choose a dynamic fselect function which does more than take a ﬁxed number of k
steps ahead? One possibility would be deﬁning a function which relies on the overlap of the state
distribution of the teacher and learner. We would also like to explore how the proposed method
may be used in combination with ideas from batch-constrained learning [8], or Random Ensemble
Mixtures [1] to better train agents entirely off-policy.

While it is only a single step towards developing complex teaching strategies, this work shows that
deﬁning teaching strategies should serve as an important step in the deep learning from demonstration
pipeline, and that by choosing naive methods we are ignoring signiﬁcant possible performance gains.

References

[1] Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. Striving for Simplicity in Off-policy Deep
Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1907.04543, 2019.

[2] M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The Arcade Learning Environment: An Evaluation
Platform for General Agents. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 2013.

[3] Yoshua Bengio, Jerome Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum Learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2009.

[4] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.

[5] Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by Random Network
Distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

[6] Seth Chaiklin. The Zone of Proximal Development in Vygotsky’s Analysis of Learning and Instruction.
Vygotsky’s Educational Theory in Cultural Context, 2003.

[7] Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Matthew Soh, and Sergey Levine. Diagnosing Bottlenecks in Deep Q-learning
Algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.

[8] Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning without
Exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.

[9] Tommaso Furlanello, Zachary C. Lipton, Michael Tschannen, Laurent Itti, and Anima Anandkumar. Born
Again Neural Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

[10] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining Improvements in Deep
Reinforcement Learning. In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.

[11] Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan, John
Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Ian Osband, John Agapiou, Joel Z. Leibo, and Audrunas
Gruslys. Deep Q-Learning From Demonstrations. In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI), 2018.

[12] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. In NIPS
Deep Learning Workshop, 2014.

[13] Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Hasselt, and
David Silver. Distributed Prioritized Experience Replay. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2018.

[14] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.

[15] Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing Off-Policy Q-Learning via
Bootstrapping Error Reduction. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.

[16] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David
Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous Control With Deep Reinforcement Learning. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

[17] Long-Ji Lin. Self-Improving Reactive Agents Based on Reinforcement Learning, Planning and Teaching.
Machine Learning, 8(3), May 1992.

[18] Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
Bowling. Revisiting the Arcade Learning Environment: Evaluation Protocols and Open Problems for
General Agents. arXiv:1709.06009, 2017.

[19] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie,
Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis
Hassabis. Human-Level Control Through Deep Reinforcement Learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 02
2015.

[20] Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcoming
Exploration in Reinforcement Learning with Demonstrations. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018.

[21] Tom Le Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Bobak Shahriari, Misha Denil, Matt Hoffman, Hubert Soyer
nd Richard Tanburn, Steven Kapturowski, Neil Rabinowitz, Duncan Williams, Gabriel Barth-Maron,
Ziyu Wang, Nando de Freitas, and Worlds Team. Making Efﬁcient Use of Demonstrations to Solve Hard
Exploration Problems. arXiv:1909.01387, 2019.

[22] Bilal Piot, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Pietquin. Boosted bellman residual minimization handling expert
demonstrations. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, pages 549–564. Springer, 2014.

[23] Tobias Pohlen, Bilal Piot, Todd Hester, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Dan Horgan, David Budden, Gabriel
Barth-Maron, Hado van Hasselt, John Quan, Mel Veˇcerík, Matteo Hessel, Rémi Munos, and Olivier
Pietquin. Observe and Look Further: Achieving Consistent Performance on Atari. arXiv:1805.11593,
2018.

[24] Stephane Ross, Geoffrey J Gordon, and J Andrew Bagnell. A Reduction of Imitation Learning and
Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics (AISTATS), 2011.

[25] Andrei A. Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirkpatrick,
Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy Distillation. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

[26] Tim Salimans and Richard Chen. Learning Montezuma’s Revenge From a Single Demonstration. Deep
Reinforcement Learning Workshop, NeurIPS, 2018.

[27] Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized Experience Replay. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

[28] Simon Schmitt, Jonathan J. Hudson, Augustin Zidek, Simon Osindero, Carl Doersch, Wojciech M.
Czarnecki, Joel Z. Leibo, Heinrich Kuttler, Andrew Zisserman, Karen Simonyan, and S. M. Ali Eslami.
Kickstarting Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1803.03835, 2018.

[29] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2nd edition, 2018.

[30] Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Quez, and David Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning With Double Q-Learning.
In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 2016.

[31] Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nicolas Heess,
Thomas Rothorl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging Demonstrations for Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning on Robotics Problems with Sparse Rewards. arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.

[32] Mel Vecerik, Oleg Sushkov, David Barker, Thomas Rothorl, Todd Hester, and Jon Scholz. A Practical Ap-
proach to Insertion with Variable Socket Position Using Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1810.01531,
2018.

[33] L. S. Vygotsky. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Harvard University
Press, 1978.

[34] Shangtong Zhang and Richard S. Sutton. A Deeper Look at Experience Replay. In Deep Reinforcement
Learning Symposium, NeurIPS, 2017.