Unsupervised Spiking Neural Networks

Shanlin Xiao*
The School of Electronics and

Zhiyi Yu*
The School of Electronics and

Mingyuan Meng
The School of Electronics and

Xingyu Yang
The School of Electronics and

Information Technology

Information Technology

Information Technology

Information Technology

Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China

Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China

Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China

Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510006, China

the performance of ANN and SNN on the cognition tasks,
SNN’s power consumption and execution latency are greatly
reduced as a consequence of its data-driven, event-based style
of computing [17]. Existing SNN algorithms can be classified
into three types: supervised [4-5], unsupervised [7-12] and
conversion [17-18]. Supervised/Unsupervised means the SNN is
trained with/without using label information, while conversion
denotes the algorithms of training an ANN first and then
converting it into a SNN to circumvent the difficulties in training
SNN directly. Currently, supervised/conversion algorithms
achieve superior performance. Despite all this, in this paper we
focus on the unsupervised SNN algorithms, because labeled data
is expensive in many application scenarios, and unsupervised
algorithms are considered to be more biologically plausible.

Abstract—Spiking Neural Network (SNN), as a brain-inspired
approach, is attracting attention due to its potential to produce ul-
tra-high-energy-efficient hardware. Competitive learning based
on Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a popular
method to train an unsupervised SNN. However, previous unsu-
pervised SNNs trained through this method are limited to a shal-
low network with only one learnable layer and cannot achieve sat-
isfactory results when compared with multi-layer SNNs. In this
paper, we eased this limitation by: 1)We proposed a Spiking In-
ception (Sp-Inception) module, inspired by the Inception module
in the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) literature. This module is
trained through STDP-based competitive learning and outper-
forms the baseline modules on learning capability, learning effi-
ciency, and robustness. 2)We proposed a Pooling-Reshape-Acti-
vate (PRA) layer to make the Sp-Inception module stackable.
3)We stacked multiple Sp-Inception modules to construct multi-
layer SNNs. Our algorithm outperforms the baseline algorithms
on the hand-written digit classification task, and reaches state-of-
the-art results on the MNIST dataset among the existing unsuper-
vised SNNs.

Competitive learning based on Spike-Timing-Dependent
Plasticity (STDP) is a popular learning method to train an
unsupervised SNN. However, the previous unsupervised SNNs
trained through this method are limited to a shallow network
with only one learnable layer [7-12] and can’t achieve
satisfactory results when compared with multi-layer SNNs. As
is shown in Fig.1(a), baseline-FC module [7] and baseline-LC
module [8] are two examples of SNN using STDP-based
competitive learning. They are both 2-layer networks where the
input layer is connected to the output layer in a Fully-Connected
(FC) or Locally-Connected (LC) fashion, and the output neurons
(i.e. the neurons in the output layer) compete with each other.
The baseline modules are limited to 2-layer networks due to its
low learning efficiency and low spiking intensity (The reasons
for this limitation is thoroughly discussed in Section VI-B). To
overcome this limitation and get a multi-layer unsupervised
SNN, our main contributions in this paper are: 1)Inspired by the
Inception module [20] in the ANN literature, we adopted the
Split-and-Merge strategy (detailed in Section II-A) to propose a
Spiking Inception (Sp-Inception) module (see Fig.1 (b)/(c)),
which is trained through STDP-based competitive learning and
outperforms the baseline modules on learning capability,
learning efficiency and robustness. 2)We proposed a Pooling-
Reshape-Activate (PRA) layer to reduce the output dimension
and enhance the spiking intensity, thus making the Sp-Inception
module stackable. 3) With the help of the PRA layer, we stacked
multiple Sp-Inception modules to build a multi-layer SNN. Our
multi-layer unsupervised SNN surpasses the baseline SNNs on
the hand-written digit classification task, and achieves state-of-

Keywords—Spiking neural networks, Unsupervised learning,
Inception module.

I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, artificial intelligence, especially neural
network, has made great progress in machine perception and
pattern recognition, reaching or even surpassing human in some
application scenarios. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has
shown good performance in pattern recognition with deep
learning, but ANN is highly computing-intensive. Therefore,
many scholars begun to focus on the research of brain-inspired
Spiking Neural Network (SNN) that is more biologically
realistic and requires less computations [1]. The renewal of
neural network is coming: neural network is evolving from the
second generation, ANN, to the third generation, SNN [2].

In contrast to the traditional ANN whose information is
represented by numerical values, the SNN uses spike trains to
represent information. Although there is a gap existing between

This work was partly supported by National Key R&D Program of
China under Grant 2017YFA0206200, Grant 2018YFB2202600 and Na-
tional Nature Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61674173,
Grant 61834005, and Grant 61902443. * Shanlin Xiao and Zhiyi Yu both
are corresponding authors of this paper.


Fig. 1. SNN modules with STDP-based competitive learning. (a) Baseline-FC/LC module. (b) Sp-Inception module, naive version. (c) Sp-Inception module,
balanced version.

the-art results on the MNIST dataset when compared with the
existing unsupervised SNNs.

Since the SNN algorithms mentioned above are all limited
to 2/3-layer networks with only one learnable layer, they are
eventually exceeded by some multi-layer SNNs trained through
supervised/conversion methods. Therefore, some scholars tried
to discard competitive learning and relied on the unsupervised
multi-layer convolutional SNNs [13-14]. These methods reach
superior performance, but their SNNs are only used to extract
image features and they require extra supervised classifier (e.g.
SVM) to finish final classifications, which makes them regarded
as semi-supervised rather than purely unsupervised algorithms
in some literatures [8,10]. From our review, this is the first paper
to use STDP-based competitive learning to train a multi-layer
unsupervised SNN and get great performance improvements.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Inception Module

Inception module was first proposed by [20] and then
evolved to many variants [21-22] in the ANN literature. The
family of Inception module has demonstrated that carefully
designed topologies are able to achieve compelling results with
low theoretical complexity. An important common property of
Inception modules is a Split-and-Merge strategy: The input is
split into a few individual pathways with a set of specialized
filters (e.g. 3 × 3, 5 × 5, 7 × 7 convolutional kernels), and then
all pathways merge by concatenation. Under this strategy, the
Inception modules can integrate multi-scale spatial information
and reduce computing complexity. Besides, multiple Inception
modules can be stacked together to form a very deep
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [20].

III. BACKGROUND

In this section, we introduce the SNN background including
computing unit model, spike coding scheme, and competitive
learning theory. The methods described below are utilized
widely [7-10] and are the default choices for the baseline
modules and the Sp-Inception module in the experiments.

Based on our review, this is the first paper to incorporate the
principle of Inception module into multi-layer unsupervised
SNNs. Our previous work [10] utilized an Inception-like multi-
pathway unsupervised SNN, but this network is not stackable
and limited to 3 layers. Xing et al. [18] built a spiking Inception
architecture but trained it through a conversion approach.

A. Neuron and Synapse Model

Spiking neuron model is used to describe the behaviors of
SNN’s basic computing unit. Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF)
model is one of the most popular spiking neuron models and is
used in this paper due to its simplicity. Moreover, there are many
more complicated neuron models like Hodgkin-Huxley (HH)
model [23] and Izhikevich model [24]. We only used a simple
LIF model to build our SNN modules for emphasizing the
effectiveness of our contributions. Following [7-8], the baseline-
FC module uses a conductance-based LIF model, while the
baseline-LC module, as well as our SP-Inception module, use a
current-based LIF model. In this paper, the dynamics of the
current-based LIF model is given by:

B. Unsupervised Learning and Multi-layer SNNs

Diehl et al. [7] (baseline-FC module) is one of the earliest
papers to use STDP-based competitive learning to train an
unsupervised SNN. It achieved the state-of-the-art result on the
hand-written digits classification task in 2015 through a simple
3-layer FC SNN. Saunders et al. [8] (baseline-LC module)
proposed to use LC connections to replace the FC connections
in [7] and got a LC SNN with higher learning efficiency and
robustness. Panda et al. [9] tried to incorporate the ‘ability to
forget’ into [7] and proposed an Adaptive Synaptic Plasticity
(ASP). She et al. [11] proposed to use a stochastic STDP in [7].
Our previous work [10] designed a fast-learning and high-
robustness unsupervised SNN with a highly parallel Inception-
like network architecture. Among them, Diehl et al. [7] and
Saunders et al. [8] are chosen to be the baseline modules,
because they can be regarded as the basis of our Sp-Inception
module, all of us focusing on network topologies.

'&())

%&

') = ,-./) −,(1) + 34(1) (1)

'5())

') = −4(1) + ∑7(89):9;(<9, 1)
>
9
%5 (2)

%5

In (1), ,(1) is the voltage (membrane potential), ,-./) is the
neuron’s resting voltage, 4(1) denotes the total input current to
the neuron, 3 is synaptic resistance, and %&/5 is the time constant
of ,(1)/4(1). In (2), A is the number of presynaptic neurons
connected to the neuron, 89 is the synapse between the neuron
and presynaptic neuron <9, and :9 is the synaptic weight of


Fig. 2. An illustration of competitive learning: The neurons in the competition
layer are interconnected by fixed inhibitory synapse and compete with other
neurons sharing the same RF (i.e. having the same set of presynaptic neurons).

applying trained SNN into image classification tasks. In general,
the unsupervised SNNs with rate-based input encoding use vote-
based methods for spike decoding [7-10]. Following [7-8], the
baseline-FC module uses a classic vote-based decoding scheme,
while the baseline-LC module utilizes a n-gram method [19] (In
detail, n = 2). In Sp-Inception module, we adopted the VFA
decoding layer proposed in [10], because we found that this
method outperforms other vote-based decoding schemes when
implemented in our Sp-Inception module.

'E())

') = ,)F-./ −B(1) + %EBGHI/;(<, 1) (3)

%E

where < denotes the neuron itself and %E is time constant of
B(1). Concretely, each time the neuron < fires a spike, the
threshold B increases by a constant BGHI/ , or it decays
exponentially to a voltage ,)F-./.

C. STDP-based Competitive Learning

The STDP rule described in Section III-A adjusts the
synaptic weight based on the relative timing of pre/postsynaptic
spikes. Under the STDP model, if a presynaptic spike tends to
occur immediately before a postsynaptic spike, the synaptic
weight is made bigger; If a presynaptic spike tends to occur
immediately after a postsynaptic spike, the synaptic weight is
made smaller. Based on the former phenomenon, STDP-based
competitive learning was proposed and widely used in many
unsupervised SNNs [7-12]. That’s also the reason why we set
LGM/) >> LG-. to emphasize the former phenomenon.

We also used a synapse model to describe the dynamics of
synaptic weight. STDP model was widely used in unsupervised
SNNs [7-12] and evolved to many variants (e.g. additive STDP
[3], triplet STDP [15]). In this paper, following [8], we used a
very basic STDP rule as follows:

∆: = K LGM/)NG-. :ℎP< QR818S<TQ1UV 8QUWP

−LG-.NGM/) :ℎP< QXP8S<TQ1UV 8QUWP (4)

where LG-./LGM/) are the pre/postsynaptic learning rates, and
NG-./NGM/) are pre/postsynaptic traces. The update of synaptic
weight : occurs when pre/postsynaptic neuron fires a spike
(named pre/postsynaptic spike). The synaptic traces are used to
record the timing of the previous spikes. The NG-./NGM/) is reset
to 1 when the pre/postsynaptic spike is fired, or they decay
exponentially to 0 with %G-./%GM/) as their time constant. Note
that we set LGM/) >> LG-. to emphasize the effects of pre-
synaptic neurons on post-synaptic neurons.

The principle of STDP-based competitive learning is each
neuron learns and represents a prototype which is initialized
randomly and gradually becomes similar to the real input
through learning. Every time a training sample is input, the
neurons compete with each other and only the one whose
represented prototype is more similar to this input sample can
fire spikes and increase its STDP-modifiable (i.e. modified
based on STDP rule) synaptic weights to make its represented
prototype even more similar to this input sample. Those winner
neurons are finally used to predict the class of the testing sample
because they respond so much to the samples similar to their
represented prototypes. The baseline-FC/LC modules and our
Sp-Inception module all are based on this learning principle. As
is shown in Fig. 2, each neuron in the competition layer is
connected to the neurons sharing the same Receptive Field (RF)
(i.e. sharing the same set of presynaptic neurons) with fixed
inhibitory synapses, which means that each neuron competes for
learning to represent a prototype appearing in real input samples.

B. Input Encoding and Spike Decoding

Information in SNN is represented by discrete spike trains,
but each pixel value in the input image is an analog value.
Therefore, we need to conduct input encoding to convert the
analog pixel values into the discrete spike trains. In this paper,
we adopted a popular rate-based encoding scheme used in [7-
10]. The input neuron (i.e. the neuron in the input layer) is a
generator of Poisson-distributed spike trains, and each input
neuron corresponds to a pixel of the input image. Each pixel
value is encoded into a Poisson-distributed spike train whose
average rate is equal to the pixel value multiplied by an encoding
parameter Z . Moreover, we adopted the adaptive encoding
scheme used in [7], because the module might be insensitive to
some images and larger Z is required sometimes.

IV. METHOD
In this section we illustrate our main contributions: in
Section IV-A we detail the design of Sp-Inception module which
can be used as an image classifier directly; in Section IV-B we
show the method of stacking multiple Sp-Inception modules to
build a multi-layer SNN.

Since the output of SNN module is also spike trains, we need
to decode the output into recognizable inference results when

Output layer

Inspired by the Inception module in the ANN literature [19-
22], we designed a naive version of Sp-Inception module. As is
shown in Fig. 1(b), the naive version is composed of several
processing pathways connected to the input layer in a FC/LC
fashion. Each pathway computes and performs competition
independently. Then, they are reshaped to one-dimension and
concatenated together. The input neurons are the generators of
Poisson-distributed spike trains, and the neurons in the
competition layer are LIF models. Following the principle of
competitive learning described in Section III-C, the input layer
and competition layers are connected with the excitatory STDP-
modified synapses, and the neurons in the competition layer are
interconnected with the fixed inhibitory synapses. The LC
connection has the same topology with the convolutional
connection but without using shared weight. We use a kernel
size W and a stride 8 to define RF (only square kernel is used in
this paper), and use a ; to denote feature map number. For FC
connection, we also use the ; to denote neuron number, because
the FC connection actually is a special case of the LC connection
where the kernel size is equal to the input layer size. In this case,
a neuron in the FC connections can be regarded as a feature map.

1st pathway

1st pathway

Activate
PRA layer
(Input layer)

Input layer

2nd pathway

2nd pathway

Reshape and
concatenation

Pooling
......

Reshape

3rd pathway

3rd pathway

......

......

Nth pathway

Nth pathway

Adjusting pooling weight


Fig. 3. An illustration of how to stack two Sp-Inception modules through a
PRA layer. The PRA layer is inserted between two Sp-Inception modules and
performs Pooling-Reshape-Activate.

Inception modules through a PRA layer. As is shown in Fig. 3,
the PRA layer is inserted between two modules and also is used
to be the input layer of latter module (in place of original input
layer). What the PRA layer does are: 1) Reduce the output
dimension of former module by pooling with size a; 2) Reshape
one-dimensional layer into three dimensions 28 × 28 × c (c is
the input channels of latter module); 3) Activate the latter
module through an adaptive pooling mechanism. The PRA layer
is composed of LIF models, so its spiking intensity can increase
if its pooling connections’ weights are enlarged. In adaptive
encoding scheme used in first module, the encoding parameter
Z is adjusted according to the module’s output spiking intensity.
Similarly, in the adaptive pooling mechanism, the pooling
connections of the PRA layer share the same weigh :G and this
:G is adjusted according to the module’s output spiking
intensity. When an image is input, if any module’s output
spiking intensity is too low, this module’s :G (or Z if this
module is the first one) will increase by a constant and then this
image is input again. With the help of PRA layer, we can make
sure that each module’s output spikes are enough for activating
its downstream modules.

In the naive version of Sp-Inception module, we make sure
there is at least one FC pathway to cope with global feature.
Then, other topology settings including pathway number,
FC/LC choice, and parameters W/8/; are decided empirically.
However, we found that there is a problem on the naive version:
the learning speed of each pathway is unbalanced and the overall
learning speed is hindered by its slowest pathway. Especially
when a pathway’s ; is set to be much larger than ones of other
pathways, this pathway would learn much more slowly, but
sometimes this situation is inevitable for achieving better
module performance. Since the learning efficiency of a pathway
mainly depends on its feature map number ; (shown in Section
V-A(2)), to solve this problem we refined the naive version by:
1)We divided a pathway with large ; into several pathways with
smaller ;. E.g. A pathway with ; = 1600 can be divided into
four pathways with ; = 400. By doing so, the learning speed of
this pathway improves with negligible performance degradation.
2)We restricted each pathway’s ; to be same. By doing so, the
learning speed of each pathway becomes balanced. Finally we
got a balanced version of Sp-Inception module in Fig. 1(c).

Theoretically, this architecture can be expanded to a very
deep multi-layer SNN if computing resources are sufficient. But
we also need to be careful to avoid overfitting. In the following
experiments, we stacked four Sp-Inception modules and got
good results on it. More details about this four-module
architecture are shown in Section V-B.

V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed Sp-Inception
module (a single module directly used as a classifier) and the
multi-layer SNN consisting of multiple stacked Sp-Inception
modules. All training and testing procedures are implemented
with the MNIST dataset [16]. In the MNIST dataset, there are
70,000 hand-written digital images labeled from 0 to 9 and each
image is 28 × 28 in size. Among them, 60,000 images are in the
training set and 10,000 images are in the testing set. More
experimental details including hyperparameter settings, training
procedures, experimental environment, and the implementations
of baseline modules are presented in the Appendix A.

B. Multi-module Architecture

To overcome the limitations of previous unsupervised SNNs
with only one learnable layer, we explored the possibility of
building a multi-layer SNN by stacking Sp-Inception modules.
However, although Inception module has shown some amazing
improvements (shown in Section V-A), there are still two
bottlenecks existing in the process of stacking modules: 1) The
Sp-Inception module’s output dimension is much more than its
input dimension, which means that the data dimension will
explode if we directly stack the Sp-Inception modules without
dimension reduction; 2)The Sp-Inception module’s low output
spiking intensity makes it unpractical to stimulate its
downstream module (detailed in Section VI-B).

A. Sp-Inception Module Evaluation

1) Learning Capability
In Table I, we report the testing results of SNN modules on
the MNIST and the number of neurons/synapses used by them
(denote by <d.I-Md/</edfG/.). Here we use (W, 8) × ; to denote
kernel size, stride, and feature map number of a LC topology and

In order to solve these two bottlenecks, we proposed a
Pooling-Reshape-Activate (PRA) layer to connect two Sp-
Inception modules. Fig. 3 shows an example on how to stack Sp-

Module
Id
Topology
hhijklh hmnhopmi Result

I
FC, ; = 400
400
473K
87.80%
II
FC, ; = 800
800
1267K 90.12%
III
FC, ; = 1600
1600
3814K 91.94%
IV
FC, ; = 6400
6400
45977K 94.88%

Baseline-FC

I
LC, (16,6) × 100
900
320K
91.36%
II
LC, (16,6) × 400
3600
2361K 93.97%
III
LC, (16,6) × 800
7200
7603K 94.83%
IV
LC, (16,6) × 1000
9000
11304K 95.02%

Baseline-LC

FC, ; = 112
LC, (24,4) × 112
LC, (16,6) × 112

I
q

u
1568
778K
93.36%

FC, ; = 224
LC, (24,4) × 224
LC, (16,6) × 224

II
q

u
3136
1909K 94.59%

2) Learning Efficiency
To evaluate the learning efficiency of Sp-Inception module,
in Fig. 4 we report the testing results of the modules trained with
varying number of training iterations. In Fig. 4(a), we compare
the modules with similar learning capability: baseline-FC IV,
baseline-LC III, and Sp-Inception III all exhibit close learning
capabilities of about 94.8% results when fully trained. Then, we
compare the modules with the same feature map number ; in
Fig. 4(b): baseline-FC I, baseline-LC II, and Sp-Inception V all
have 400 feature maps; baseline-FC II and baseline-LC III both
have 800 feature maps. Since Sp-Inception module with ; =
800 is impractical for implementation, it’s not tested in Fig. 4(b).

(FC,; = 300) × 4
(LC, (24,4) × 300) ×

III v

2w
6300
4904K 94.86%

LC, (16,6) × 300

FC, ; = 448
LC, (24,4) × 448
LC, (16,6) × 448

Sp-Inception

IV
q

u
6272
5224K 95.57%

(FC,; = 400) × 4
(LC, (24,4) × 400) ×

V v

2w
8400
7379K 95.62%

LC, (16,6) × 400

FC, ; = 448
LC, (24,4) × 448
LC, (16,6) × 448
LC, (10,6) × 448

VI
x

y
13440
9153K 95.85%

Through Fig. 4, we find that: 1) The learning efficiency of a
module mainly depends on its feature map number ;. E.g. In Fig.



Fig. 4. Testing results of the modules trained with varying number of training iterations. (a) Comparison among the modules with similar learning capability. (b)
Comparison among the modules with the same feature map number ;.



Fig. 5. Testing results of the modules whose neurons/synapses are randomly deleted with varying probability z'.H.).. (a) Neuron deletion. (b)Synapse deletion.

Network
First/stacked Module
hhijklh hmnhopmi
Result

1st module
Sp-Inception I
1568
778K
93.36%
+2nd module + Sp-Inception II, a = 1
4707
3894K
95.17%
+3rd module
+ Sp-Inception IV, a = 2
10976
11533K
96.03%
+4th module + Sp-Inception VI, a = 2
24416
23818K
96.48%

TABLE III.
COMPARISON OF TESTING RESULTS ON THE MNIST
DATASET AMONG THE EXISTING UNSUPERVISED SNN ALGORITHMS

Paper
Description
Result
Diehl et al.

2015 [7]
3-layer FC SNN (Baseline-FC module)
95.00%

Saunders et al.

2019 [8]
2-layer LC SNN (Baseline-LC module)
95.07%

Panda et al.

3-layer FC SNN with Adaptive Synaptic
Plasticity (ASP)
96.80%

3) Robustness
Robustness is network’s resistance against external damage
and interferences. To evaluate it, we followed the evaluation
scheme used in [8,10]. Concretely, we randomly deleted some
learnable synapses or output neurons of the trained baseline-FC
IV/baseline-LC III/Sp-Inception III with probability z'.H.). ,
then we report their testing results in Fig. 5. As can be seen in
Fig. 5, the three modules without any neuron/synapse deletion
reach the results of about 94.8% on the MNIST, while increasing
z'.H.). leads to a smooth degradation in testing results.

2017 [9]

Meng et al.

2019 [10]
Inception-like multi-pathway 3-layer SNN
95.64%

She et al.
2019 [11]
3-layer FC SNN with stochastic STDP
96.10%

Lammie et al.

2-layer FC SNN (FPGA neuromorphic
system)
94.00%

2018 [12]

Ours
Single Sp-Inception module
95.85%

Ours
Multi-layer SNN consisting of four Sp-In-
ception modules
96.48%



Fig. 5(a) shows the testing results after deleting neurons with
probability z'.H.). and our Sp-Inception module exhibits the
highest robustness. Sp-Inception III maintains nearly 90% and
80% results respectively with even 92% and 98% of neurons
deleted, while baseline-FC IV and baseline-LC III maintain
nearly 80% and 85% results with only 80% of neurons deleted.
Similarly, Fig. 5(b) shows the testing results after deleting
synapses with probability z'.H.). and our Sp-Inception module
still exhibits the highest robustness. Sp-Inception III maintains
nearly 90% and 80% results respectively with even 80% and 92%
of synapses deleted, while baseline-FC IV and baseline-LC III
only maintain nearly 70% and 65% results with only 80% of
synapses deleted. This experiments demonstrate that Sp-
Inception module has higher robustness against external damage
and destruction. It can work well even through most of its
learnable synapses or computing neurons break down.

the state-of-the-art results on the MNIST dataset. Admittedly,
our method’s result is not the best one in Table III. But our
contributions are merely about architecture design, and we only
used very basic neuron model, spiking coding, and learning rule.
Therefore, our method can be in conjunction with other more
advanced SNN components (e.g. ASP [9], stochastic STDP
[11]) to build a better recognition system.

VI. DISCUSSION

A. Why does the Sp-Inception module outperform the baseline

modules?
The Sp-Inception module, as well as the Inception module
[20-22], have some common properties with visual cortex of
human brain. For instance, in the same area of visual cortex,
neurons possess different RF sizes and work efficiently in
parallel [6]. It’s well known that visual cortex performs amazing
learning capability, learning efficiency, and robustness, which
motivates us to answer this question from this perspective.

B. Multi-module Archiecture Evaluation

Due to the limitations of experimental time and computing
resources, we only stacked four Sp-Inception modules and
trained them as a whole multi-layer SNN. In the four-module
architecture, we can use the output of any middle modules to
perform inference and see the improvements got by stacking
each module. In Table II, we report the testing results along with
the number of neurons/synapses we’ve used after we stack each
module. a denotes the pooling size of PRA layer. As is shown
in Table II, the testing result increases as more modules are
stacked, which shows our multi-module architecture works.

In the Sp-Inception module, multiple processing pathways
with different topologies (e.g. FC fashion, LC fashion with
different RF sizes) enable the module to collect multi-scale
spatial information, thus helping improve its learning capability.
Moreover, this design enables each processing pathway to learn
and compute in parallel, which significantly enhances the
learning efficiency and robustness. Actually, Saunders et al. [8]
has proven that the baseline-LC outperforms the baseline-FC on
learning efficiency and robustness. We took a further step to
combine baseline-LC module and multiple processing pathways.

We also compare our method with the existing unsupervised
SNN algorithms on the MNIST dataset. The testing results of
compared algorithms are found in the corresponding references
and then directly listed in Table III. Note that the semi-
supervised algorithms such as [13-14] are excluded because the
comparison becomes unfair when they use extra supervised
classifier like SVM. As is shown in Table III, our methods reach

B. Why is the Sp-Inception module, rather than the baseline

modules, stackable?
Baseline-FC module is not stackable partly because it learns
too slow. Referring to [7] and our experiments, the baseline-FC

AND SP-INCEPTION MODULE

Module
Baseline-FC Baseline-LC Sp-Inception Sp-Inception

+PRA layer
Output Intensity
(spikes / iteration)
7.84
58.26
142.83
2294.87

Input Intensity
(spikes / iteration)
3451.26
3284.85
2936.65



module with 6400 neurons needs to be trained with 900,000
iterations, which is ten times slower than Sp-Inception module.
If the baseline-FC modules are stacked, learning efficiency is
even lower. However, merely this answer is not enough because
baseline-LC module learns much faster but is still unstackable.
To fully answer this question, in Table IV we report the average
output spiking intensity of baseline-FC IV, baseline-LC III, Sp-
Inception IV, and the average input spiking intensity when they
are trained. It’s well shown that, compared with the input spiking
intensity, the output spiking intensity of baseline module is too
low to motivate another module. However, with the help of the
PRA layer, the output spiking intensity of Sp-inception module
is high enough to motivate its downstream modules.


Fig. 6. Input spiking distributions of each stacked modules. (a) Input images
of digit 0. (b) Input images of digit 1. (c) Overlap between (a) and (b).

C. Why do the stacked Sp-Inception modules outperform the

single Sp-Inception module?
To answer this question, we looked inside the network and
saw what each stacked module receives when processing an
image. In Fig. 6, we visualized the input spiking distribution of
each stacked module in a four-module architecture. Fig. 6(a)/(b)
show the average input spiking distributions for four stacked
modules when processing the images of digit 0/1, and each dark
spot denotes the possibility of module receiving input spikes in
this position (the darker it’s, the more likely the module receives
input spikes). Fig. 6(c) shows the overlap of two input spiking
distributions. As is shown in Fig. 6, we find that the overlap area
becomes smaller with more modules stacked. This gives us a
possible assumption: The input received by later module is more
spatially distinctive because the input spikes corresponding to
the different classes tend to occur in different positions, which
makes it easier for later module to classify the input.


Fig. 7. MSDS matrixs over the input spiking maps of 10 classes from 0 to 9.

The Sp-Inception module can outperform the baseline modules
on learning capability, learning efficiency, and robustness; 2)
The multi-module architecture exhibits better classification
performance than a single Sp-Inception module, and reaches the
state-of-the-art results on the MNIST dataset when compared
with the existing unsupervised SNN algorithms. In Section VI,
we discussed the reasons why we got these improvements: 1)
Multiple processing pathways with different kernels (i.e. RF
sizes) and high parallelism of Sp-Inception module help
explaining its superior performance; 2) The spiking intensity is
tested to answer why the Sp-Inception module, rather than the
baseline modules, is stackable; 3) The input of each module in a
four-module architecture is visualized to show each module’s
effect on its downstream module.

To further validate this assumption, we calculated Mean
Spatial Distribution Similarity (MSDS, detailed in Appendix B)
of the input spiking maps belonging to the different classes, and
visualized them in Fig. 7. In each iteration, we recorded the input
spike number in each position and used it as pixel value to draw
an input spiking map. In Fig. 7, if the MSDS value is closer to 1,
the input spiking maps have more similar spatial distribution and
vice versa. We also report the average MSDS values alongside
the figure. As is shown in Fig. 7, the MSDS of input spiking
maps tends to decrease with more module stacked, which
validates our above assumption.

The Sp-Inception module eases the limitations of previous
shallow unsupervised SNNs (the baseline modules). Its high
learning efficiency and the proposed PRA layer make the Sp-
Inception module stackable to form a multi-layer unsupervised
SNN. Note that the results in this paper are not the ceiling of our
method. Better performance could be achieved if more Sp-
Inception modules are stacked or better hyperparameters are
found. Moreover, in order to emphasize the effectiveness of our
contributions (merely about architecture design), other SNN
components (e.g. neuron model, synapse model, spiking coding
scheme, etc.) are very simple. Our contributions can be in
conjunction with other more sophisticated SNN components to
get stronger SNN algorithms.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a Sp-Inception module to
construct the unsupervised SNNs for image classification tasks.
The Sp-Inception module not only can be used directly as an
unsupervised classifier but also is stackable to build multi-layer
unsupervised SNNs. In Section V, we evaluated the proposed
Sp-Inception module and the multi-layer SNN composed of
stacked Sp-Inception modules. It’s shown in Section V that: 1)

APPENDIX

A. Experimental Details

Our experiments ran on a 8-core system with 32GB RAM in
an Ubuntu environment. All codes are based on an open-source
simulator, Brian [25]. We strictly followed the parameter

Hyperparameter
Description
Value
LGM/)
Postsynaptic learning rate
0.01

LG-.
Presynaptic learning rate
0.0001

%G-./%GM/)
Time constant of NG-. NGM/)
20ms

,)F-./
Threshold voltage
-52mv
,-./)
Resting voltage
-65mv
,-./.)
Resetting voltage
-65mv
BGHI/
Increment for adaptive threshold
0.05mv

C-.D
Time length of refractory period
5ms

%&/5
Time constant of ä(1)/4(1)
100ms/1ms

%E
Time constant of adaptive B
107ms

settings, network architectures, and training procedures used in
[7-8] to implement the baseline modules except that: 1) The
inhibitory layer in [7] was replaced by the inter-connections of
excitatory layer; 2) The input size in [8] was changed from
20 × 20 to 28 × 28 . For our Sp-Inception module, all
hyperparameters are empirical values (listed in Table V). We
estimated the scopes of parameter values according to the related
references [7-12] and then decided them through the cross-
validation in which we randomly chose 10,000 images from the
training set as a validation set.

Networks for Unsupervised Feature Learning" arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.01680 (2019).
[11] She, Xueyuan, Yun Long, and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. "Fast and Low-

Precision Learning in GPU-Accelerated Spiking Neural Network." 2019
Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE).
IEEE, 2019.
[12] Lammie, Corey, Tara Hamilton, and Mostafa Rahimi Azghadi.

"Unsupervised character recognition with a simplified fpga neuromorphic
system." 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS). IEEE, 2018.
[13] Kheradpisheh, Saeed Reza, et al. "STDP-based spiking deep

After the hyperparameters were decided, we used all 60,000
images of training set to train our network. We adopted the
training procedures used in [10] and the weight normalization
used in [8]. Moreover, in order to speed up the simulation of
multi-module architecture, we forwarded the spiking activities
module by module rather than simulated the whole multi-
module network simultaneously. Specifically, we recorded the
neuron activities of the former module and then used them to
stimulate the latter module. But this change won’t cause any
problem because each module computes locally and is not
interfered by its downstream modules.

convolutional neural networks for object recognition." Neural Networks
99 (2018): 56-67.
[14] Falez, Pierre, et al. "Multi-layered spiking neural network with target

timestamp threshold adaptation and stdp." 2019 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2019.
[15] Pfister, Jean-Pascal, and Wulfram Gerstner. "Triplets of spikes in a model

of spike timing-dependent plasticity." Journal of Neuroscience 26.38
(2006): 9673-9682.
[16] LeCun, Yann, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher JC Burges. "The MNIST

database of handwritten digits, 1998." URL lecun.
com/exdb/mnist 10 (1998): 34.
[17] Neil, Daniel, Michael Pfeiffer, and Shih-Chii Liu. "Learning to be

B. Mean Spatial Distribution Similarity (MSDS)

To measure the mean similarity of spatial distributions of the
images belonging to two sets, we define a Mean Spatial
Distribution Similarity (MSDS). Assume that there are A{
images in set c{ and A| images in set c|. Then, each image is
normalized so that its mean pixel value is equal to 1. The MSDS
between c{ and c| is defined as follows:

efficient: Algorithms for training low-latency, low-compute deep spiking
neural networks." Proceedings of the 31st annual ACM symposium on
applied computing. 2016.
[18] Xing, Fu, et al. "Homeostasis-Based CNN-to-SNN Conversion of

Inception and Residual Architectures." International Conference on
Neural Information Processing. Springer, Cham, 2019.
[19] Hazan, Hananel, et al. "Unsupervised learning with self-organizing

spiking neural networks." 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2018.
[20] Szegedy, Christian, et al. "Going deeper with convolutions." Proceedings

{

>Ä×>Å ∑
∑
~•~(c{(U), c|(Ç))
>Å
É
>Ä
9
(5)

}~•~(c{,c|) =

{

∑|4{(W) −4|(W)|
â
Ñ
(6)

of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015.
[21] Szegedy, Christian, et al. "Rethinking the inception architecture for

~•~(4{, 4|) = 1 −

∑5Ä(Ñ)
Ö
Ü
á∑5Å(Ñ)
Ö
Ü

where SDS is the spatial distribution similarity between two
images, ~ is the size of image 4{/4| , and 4{(W)/4|(W) denotes the
kth pixel value of image 4{/4|.

computer vision." Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. 2016.
[22] Szegedy, Christian, et al. "Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact

of residual connections on learning." Thirty-First AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. 2017.
[23] Hodgkin, Alan L., and Andrew F. Huxley. "A quantitative description of

REFERENCES

[1]
Tavanaei, Amirhossein, et al. "Deep learning in spiking neural
networks." Neural Networks 111 (2019): 47-63.
[2]
Maass, Wolfgang. "Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of
neural network models." Neural networks 10.9 (1997): 1659-1671.

membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in
nerve." The Journal of physiology 117.4 (1952): 500-544.
[24] Izhikevich, Eugene M. "Simple model of spiking neurons." IEEE

Transactions on neural networks 14.6 (2003): 1569-1572.
[25] Goodman, Dan FM, and Romain Brette. "The brian simulator." Frontiers

in neuroscience 3 (2009): 26.