Int. J. System of Systems Engineering, (in press)
1

Towards Digital Engineering

-- The Advent of Digital Systems Engineering

Jingwei Huang*, Adrian Gheorghe, Holly Handley,
Pilar Pazos, Ariel Pinto, Samuel Kovacic, Andrew Collins,
Charles Keating, Andres Sousa-Poza, Ghaith Rabadi,
Resit Unal, Teddy Cotter, Rafael Landaeta, Charles Daniels

Department of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering
Old Dominion University
2101 Engineering Systems Building, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
Email:
*Corresponding author

Abstract: Digital Engineering, the digital transformation of engineering to
leverage digital technologies, is coming globally. This paper explores digital
systems engineering, which aims at developing theory, methods, models, and
tools to support digital engineering practice. A critical task is to digitalize
engineering artifacts, thus enabling information & model sharing, traceability,
and accountability across platforms, across lifecycle, and across domains. We
identify challenges and enabling digital technologies; analyse the transition from
traditional engineering to digital engineering; define core concepts, including
digitalization, unique identification, digitalized artifacts, digital augmentation,
and others; present a big picture of digital systems engineering in four levels:
vision, strategy, action, and foundation; briefly discuss each of main areas of
research. Digitalization enables fast infusing and leveraging novel digital
technologies; unique identification enables information traceability and
accountability in lifecycle; provenance enables tracing dependency relations
among engineering artifacts, supporting model reproducibility and replicability,
and helping with trustworthiness evaluation of digital artifacts.

Keywords: Digital Engineering; Digital Systems Engineering; Industry 4.0; Big
Data; Digital Transformation; Digitalization; Unique Identification; Provenance;
Model of Models; Digital Models; Digital Augmentation; Digital Trust.

Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Huang, J., Gheorghe, A.,
Handley, H., Pazos, P., Pinto, A., Kovacic, S., Collins, A., Keating, C., Sousa-
Poza, A., Rabadi, G., Unal, R., Cotter, T., Landaeta, R. and Daniels, C. ‘Towards
digital engineering: the advent of digital systems engineering’, Int. J. System of
Systems Engineering, (forthcoming), DOI: 10.1504/IJSSE.2020.10031364.
arXiv:2002.11672.

1. Introduction
In order to rapidly infuse innovative digital technologies and to meet the new demands
from the digitalizing world, Digital Engineering, the digital transformation of
engineering, is emerging with different names globally, such as Industry 4.0 (GTAI,
2014), digital manufacturing or smart manufacturing (White House, 2012, 2018), and

J. Huang et. al.

others. Many problems appeared in traditional engineering and acquisition processes,
such as linear engineering process to develop complex systems, document-intensive and
stove-piped information flow, hard to change and sustain systems in rapidly changing and
uncertain operational environment, and others. To address those problems, the US
Department of Defense (DoD) launched the Digital Engineering Strategy (DES) (US
DoD, 2018), aiming to build digital enterprise and to fast incorporate technological
innovation by means of digitally representing the system of interest, developing, using,
integrating and curating formal model across organizational boundaries and lifecycle
activities, and using "Authoritative Source of Truth" as the central platform and
repository for collaborating, communicating, and sharing data and models. This strategy
exhibits a profound vision for “transforming engineering practices to digital engineering
and incorporating technological innovations to produce an integrated, digital, model-
based approach” (US DoD, 2018). Towards this direction, research efforts combining
digital technologies into systems engineering (SE) to meet the new demands from the
digitalizing world are converging into an emerging field – digital systems engineering,
which aims at developing knowledge and technology to support digital engineering
practice. This paper explores this exciting area.
First of all, let us briefly look into the new landscape of engineering systems. The fast-
growing Internet of Things (IoT) (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010; IEEE, 2015) is
dramatically changing the world; IoT has become a trigger for numerous innovative
applications, leading to various cyber-physical-social smart systems (CPS3) (Huang,
Seck, & Gheorghe, 2016). Particularly, Industrial IoT (IIoT) (Sisinni, Saifullah, Han,
Jennehag, & Gidlund, 2018; H. Xu, Yu, Griffith, & Golmie, 2018) and industrial smart
CPSs are paving the way to the fourth industrial revolution (Schwab, 2017), or in short,
so-called Industry 4.0 (GTAI, 2014; L. Da Xu, Xu, & Li, 2018). IoT is quickly changing
the landscape of engineering systems from the beginning of systems design through the
end of lifecycle. By using IoT, Big Data technologies, AI, and Machine Learning (ML),
the fingerprints (or footprints) of a system (i.e., the dynamic changes of system status and
changes of components and behavior) can be potentially traced in the whole system
lifecycle. Similarly, the dynamic changes of the system's operating environment can be
observed, recorded, and mined to provide valuable information for engineering systems
design, testing, manufacturing, operations, maintenance and support, reuse and recycle,
as well as risk analysis toward trustworthy and resilient systems.
Highly associated with IoT, digital transformation, a term reflecting the pervasive
diffusion of digital technologies in engineering, business, and many societal processes, is
profoundly changing almost every aspect of human being’s activities, from our daily life
to various businesses, including science and engineering.
Jim Grey had a vision that science is transforming into the fourth paradigm – data-
intensive paradigm, after empirical, theoretical, and computational (Hey, Tansley, &
Tolle, 2009). In the data-intensive paradigm, the essential activities are data capture, data
curation, knowledge discovery from data, and data publishing. A theory is an abstraction
of the known knowledge about a system, thus having limitations. Data (the observations
of a system) can bring in new insight for better understanding and can provide
opportunities for new findings and get a breakthrough towards establishing a new theory.
This vision has inspired data-intensive research in many science & engineering
disciplines and the development of Data Science (Hey et al., 2009; NIST, 2015).
Digital engineering incorporates digital technologies such as IoT, smart cyber-physical
systems, big data, AI, ML, robotics, virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), digital
twin (Glaessgen & Stargel, 2012; Tao et al., 2018), 3D printing, digital trust, and
blockchain (Katina, Keating, Sisti, & Gheorghe, 2019; Nakamoto, 2008; Wang et al.,

Towards Digital Engineering

2019). A remarkable example is the onset of digital manufacturing. Digital engineering is
a manifestation of digital transformation in the field of engineering.
The contents of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the goals of
DoD DES; section 3 discusses the significant challenges to achieving those goals; section
4 briefly discusses critical enabling technologies; then in section 5, we present the
framework of digital systems engineering, defines a small set of core concepts, and
discusses areas of interest in four levels: vision, strategy, action, and foundation with
enabling technologies; finally, section 6 concludes the paper and briefly discuss further
research.

2. Goals of Digital Engineering Strategy
The central theme of the DoD’s Digital Engineering Strategy (US DoD, 2018) is to
digitally represent systems of interest and to enable formal model development,
integration and use across the system lifecycle phrases through “Authoritative Source of
Truth”, as illustrated in figure 1. The strategy identifies five tightly related goals.

Fig. 1. Illustration of models connected via Authoritative Source of Truth in US DoD

Digital Engineering (from (US DoD, 2018), Fig.4).

The first goal is fundamental, which targets the formalized planning of model creation,
curation, integration, and use to support decision making, by advocating digitally
representing the system of interest; by establishing policy, guidance, rules and
standardized syntax, semantics, and lexicons for model development and reuse; by
capturing and maintaining model provenance to enable traceability as a basis of judging
model trustworthiness for model reuse; and by curating a set of standardized models in
the “Authoritative Source of Truth” to enable collaborative engineering activities and
decision making across different disciplines and organizations in the system lifecycle.
The second goal targets the establishment of trustworthy knowledge infrastructure,
called “Authoritative Source of Truth” (AST), for hosting and sharing across the lifecycle
the standardized models, data, and other digital artifacts, which are traditionally isolated
within the boundaries of organizations or disciplines. AST supports to capture and curate
the history of model evolution through the engineering lifecycle, to maintain the

J. Huang et. al.

traceability, and propagates the updated models and data to all affected systems and
entities for supporting the coordination of associated activities, thus “to enable delivery
of the right data to the right person for the right use at the right time." Stakeholder
organizations will establish policies and procedures to govern the proper use of AST,
including - access control to ensure access by only the authorized users, the use of AST
as technical baseline to support engineering decision making on cost, schedule, and
performance, to support technical review, and to support communication and
collaboration across teams and organizations.
The third goal aims to establish an end-to-end digital enterprise operating in the
digitalized and connected environment, to rapidly innovate, infuse, and adopt advanced
technologies such as big data analytics, cloud computing, AI & ML, virtual reality,
augmented reality, digital twins, digital manufacturing, 3D printing, and many others;
and to advance human-machine interactions.
The fourth goal aims to transform the current IT infrastructures and environment,
which are “often stove-piped, complex, and difficult to manage, control, secure, and
support” (US DoD, 2018), into digital engineering infrastructures and environment,
which are expected to be “a more consolidated, collaborative trusted environment” (US
DoD, 2018). Digital engineering infrastructures and environments will need able to
provide: (a) secure connected information networks supporting computing and
information flows at all security levels; (b) the associated evolving digital engineering
methods, processes, and tools for visualization, analysis, model management, model
interoperability, workflow, collaboration, and extension/customization support; (c)
cybersecurity to secure IT infrastructures and to protect intellectual property such as
patents, copyrights, trademarks, and other commercial proprietaries through collaborative
efforts between government and industrial partners.
Finally, the fifth goal targets the transformation of culture and workforce, including -
advance digital engineering policies, standards, and guides; accommodate digital
engineering development; digital engineering management; building and preparing
workforce via training and education.

G3: Establish end-to-end digital enterprise to rapidly infuse digital technologies
and incorporate technological innovations

Desired
capabilities

G1: Enable formalized model creation, curation,
sharing, integration and use across boundaries of
lifecycle phases and organizations

Core transformation

Trusted repository and the
point of sharing across boundaries

G2: Provide Authoritative Source of Truth

G4: Transform to DE IT infrastructures and environment

Infrastructure foundation

G5: Transform culture and workforce towards Digital Engineering (DE)
Workforce foundation

Fig. 2. Relations among Goals of DoD Digital Engineering Strategy

The relations among those goals can be illustrated as a goal stack as shown in figure 2,
where from bottom to top,

•
Goal 5 is the organizational and human foundation aiming at transforming
culture and workforce to provide the eco-environment for the growth of digital
engineering, which is fundamental to all other goals;

Towards Digital Engineering

•
Goal 4 transforms traditional IT into new IT infrastructures and service
environment for digital engineering. Goal 4 is the IT basis for others;
•
Goal 2 creates and maintains the Authoritative Source of Truth, which is the
repository and access portal for all standardized models and other digital
artifacts, with support from goal 4, and is a basis for goal 1;
•
Goal 1 transforms traditional engineering towards formalized model creation,
curation, sharing, integration, and use across the boundaries of lifecycle phases,
disciplinary teams, and organizations, with support from goal 2;
•
Goal 3 establishes an end-to-end digital enterprise to quickly infuse advanced
digital technologies and keep rapid innovations, with support from goal 1. Goal
3, as a driving force, produces new requirements for all other goals.
What is in the core of the digital engineering strategy is the digital transformations
requiring:

•
Digital representation of the system of interest (including not only the focused
system and its components, but also possibly the relevant processes, equipment,
products, parts, functions, services, and other relevant systems in the operating
environment);
•
Use of Authoritative Source of Truth (AST) as the repository and the access
portal of standardized models, data, and other digital artifacts;
•
Formalized model creation, curation, sharing, integration, and use across the
boundaries of disciplinary teams, organizations, and the lifecycle phases, with
support of AST.

3. Challenges
Given the targeted goals, the core digital transformations in need, and the current
engineering practice, there are many challenges ahead on the way of digital engineering
transformation.
Challenge 1: Big Data issues in digital engineering – In the envisioned digital
engineering operating in digital and connected environment, every engineering process
will face unprecedented Big Data from upstream engineering processes, from engineering
partners, from the lifecycle of the system of interest and previous engineering systems
(older versions or similar ones), from interacting external systems, from system operating
environment, from supply-chain and manufacturing environment, from stakeholders, and
others. Those data have not only unprecedented large size but also various forms of
different qualities and possible in high velocity of streaming in. The big data brings both
opportunities and challenges. On the one hand, an engineering team can leverage new
information to improve the quality and to reduce engineering time and cost; on the other
hand, the big data poses a significant challenge regarding how to quickly process,
manage, mining, analysis, integrate those data and shared models in digital engineering
practice. It is also a challenge for engineering teams to collect, manage, and share the
data and models produced in their engineering process.
Challenge 2: Centralized standardization vs. distributed evolutionary
standardization -- Standardized or commonly shared digital representation forms,
semantics, and vocabulary are critical for sharing digitalized engineering artifacts
(particularly models). In a centralized approach of standardization, a standardized form is
defined for digital representation, and the whole community stays with the standard. In a
distributed evolutionary approach, ontologies are developed in a crowdsourcing fine-
grained evolving process, in which many working groups develop their versions of

J. Huang et. al.

ontologies by constructing new ontology parts on top of useful parts from other existing
ontologies. In this way, some ontology parts, which are most commonly used by a
community, naturally converge to a “standard” language. The DoD digital engineering
strategy appears towards centralized standardization, which could be a fast and effective
engineering approach for the US DoD community. However, there exists a risk of stiffing
innovations if standards are applied too early in emerging new fields of technological
innovation. Also, business partners worldwide may have their own standards, and the
compatibility between standards could be a challenge. It is always a challenge to choose
between centralized approaches and distributed evolutionary approaches. Generally
speaking, compared with distributed approach, a centralized approach may be more
efficient and more effective in the current context, and at least in the near term. However,
it also has two related significant issues: a single point of failure and heading in a wrong
direction from a long term view. It is of paramount importance to keep and maintain
diversity in the course of evolution, no matter to biological populations or technological
approaches.
Challenge 3: Centralized vs. distributed mechanisms of trust – In the US DoD
DES, Authoritative Source of Truth plays a fundamental role in assuring the
trustworthiness of models about credibility, accuracy, reusability, safety, and security, as
well as other concerned qualities. The challenging issues between centralized or
distributed approaches also exist here. The proposed AST appears a centralized
mechanism of trust; again, this could be a fast and effective engineering approach.
However, given the fact that today's industry has long and complicated supply-chains and
many system components could come from allies and trading partners, how to efficiently
and effectively incorporate distributed mechanisms of trust in AST is a challenge.
Challenge 4: Balancing access and control in AST -- DoD DES aims "to enable
delivery of right data to the right person for the right use at the right time" via AST.
Access control has been a delicate matter for decades. The challenge still stands in digital
engineering. Many entities involved in the engineering workflows may use different
access control models and policies, such as MAC (Bell & LaPadula, 1973), RBAC
(Sandhu, Coyne, Feinstein, & Youman, 1996), ABAC (Servos & Osborn, 2017), and
their combinations (Huang, Nicol, Bobba, & Huh, 2012; Jin, Sandhu, & Krishnan, 2012),
applied to their own domains. It will be challenging to create access control policies for
AST to work seamlessly with each entity's access control system to reach the targeted
goal. In addition to the grave threats of cybersecurity, the models and data about products
are also their owners' major concerns about intellectual property protection and business
competitivity. All those complex factors have to be taken into account of the access
control mechanisms in AST. Basically, it is always a challenging regarding to balancing
“need-to-know” and “need-to-share”.
Challenge 5: Scientific Computing Integrity of digital models -- Scientific
computing integrity (SCI) is defined as “the ability to have high confidence that the
scientific data that is generated, processed, stored, or transmitted by computers and
computer-connected devices has a process, provenance, and correctness that is
understood” by DOE ASCR (Advanced Scientific Computing Research) (Peisert,
Cybenko, & Jajodia, 2015). Although the concept of SCI is proposed in the context of
DOE extreme-scale computing, SCI is also a great challenge to digital engineering. Given
the high complexity of engineering workflows across lifecycle phases, across
organizational boundaries, and across countries, many models and data produced by
different entities in those complex engineering workflows, are going to stream into AST
and be reused later. However, the SCI of those models and data could be compromised
for many reasons, such as malicious attacks and faults caused by equipment/devices,

Towards Digital Engineering

software, networks, engineers or workers (Huang, 2018). Those risk factors, the
complexity of engineering workflows, long and complex supply chains, and long and
complex provenance chains of those models and data make ensuring SCI in Digital
Engineering extremely difficult, thus posing a significant challenge.
Challenge 6: Reproducibility and Replicability – There are different definitions
about the relevant concepts of reproducibility, replicability, and generalization. This
paper uses a more popular one from NSF (NSF_SBE_AC, 2015), reproducibility is the
extent to allow a researcher to independently duplicate the results of a prior study with
the same procedures and the same data; replicability is to independently duplicate the
results with the same procedures but different data; generalizability is the extent that the
results of a study apply to other contexts different from the original one. The journal
Nature had a special collection dedicated to the “challenges in irreproducible research” to
reveal the “growing alarm about results that cannot be reproduced” (Nature, 2018).
Recently, a Nobel laureate retracted her latest paper published in the Science journal for
reproducibility issue (BBC, 2020). Earlier, among 1576 researchers surveyed by journal
Nature, “More than 70% of researchers have tried and failed to reproduce another
scientist's experiments” (Baker, 2016), including engineering. In engineering practice,
additional complexity comes from the possible loss of techniques, skills, and know-how
knowledge living in human teams.
Challenge 7: Practical difficulties in producing products’ digital counterparts -- In
digital engineering, an enterprise needs to produce not only products (no matter which is
hardware, software, or service) and their traditional technical documentation but also the
associated digital counterparts including the models for a product, the data supporting the
models, as well as associated knowledge. This change is a significant transformation for
product producers, thus practically posing some big challenges to enterprises about those
digital counterparts. Examples of challenging issues include higher standards on model
credibility, repeatability, interpretability, interoperability, intellectual property protection,
security, cost, well-trained workforces, and others.
Challenge 8: Insufficient knowledge in the workforce – Workforce is essential for
the realization of digital engineering. The knowledge and skills required for digital
engineering practice are beyond the ones of the traditional engineering workforce and
beyond traditional engineering education and training programs. It is a challenge for
training a large population of engineers with a varied professional background in the
current workforce through on-job training and engineering education programs.
In the emerging digitalized and connected environment, systems engineering is facing
many new challenges beyond we discussed above and facing many new research issues.
Just list a few: how does an enterprise transform its enterprise culture and policies with
sharing engineering artifacts across engineering stages and across multiple organizations?
How does the digitalized and connected engineering environment impact human-machine
interactions (Handley, 2019), considering both unprecedented rich information and
complexity? Furthermore, in this environment, how could teams collaborate (Powell &
Pazos, 2017) more efficiently? How does transparency in this environment improve trust
(Huang & Nicol, 2013)? What are new risks introduced in digital engineering? How does
a better understanding of those risks improve system design (Pinto et al., 2009)? Many
interesting and important issues need attention.

J. Huang et. al.

4. Key Enabling Technologies
We have been working on to identify a set of key enabling technologies for digital
engineering. For space limitation, it is impossible to have a comprehensive review of
enabling technologies in this paper; here, we briefly discuss several clusters of key
enabling technologies. Let us start with AI&ML cluster, which plays a central and
fundamental role.
AI and machine learning cluster: Enabling to establish a foundation for continuing
exploration of automation in digital engineering; enabling digital representation of system
of interest; enabling model building through machine learning; enabling intelligent
reasoning, control, scheduling, planning, and decision making for digital enterprises. For
AI’s tremendous impacts to almost every aspect of society, U.S. launched the national AI
research and development strategy (US NSTC, 2016, 2019). Earlier, Stanford
University’s report on one hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100)
(Stanford, 2016) presents a big picture of AI history and future. Machine learning
(LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015) together with Big Data technologies (such as Apache
Spark's TensorFlowOnSpark, Apache Hadoop Submarine) will enable building system
models with big data gathered from the digitalized and connected system lifecycle.
Reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2018; Sutton & Barto, 2018) (e.g., as achieved by
AlphGo that defeated world #1 player in Go game) will enable to keep improving a
system’s performance in operations. After a journey from general to domain-focused, AI
now again is towards artificial general intelligence (Adams et al., 2012), which is paving
the way for innovation of new generation of intelligent engineering systems.
Ontologies and semantics technologies cluster: Enabling semantic representation of
the general properties of models and their relations; enabling model sharing and
integration across boundaries of enterprises, disciplines, and engineering stages; enabling
digital representation of enterprise-related concepts and processes. "An ontology is a
formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization" (Gruber, 1993; Studer,
Benjamins, & Fensel, 1998). Ontologies and semantic web are related subfields of AI,
focusing on formalizing the semantics and knowledge sharing (Baclawski et al., 2018;
Fritzsche et al., 2017). Intensive research on enterprise modeling and enterprise
integration has been conducted since 1990s and can be used to support model sharing
across boundaries (Chen, Doumeingts, & Vernadat, 2008; Fox & Huang, 2005;
Goranson, 2002).
Provenance modeling cluster: Enabling to represent and maintain the provenance of
engineering artifacts, particularly models; enabling tracing dependency relations among
digital engineering artifacts; supporting model reproducibility and replicability; helping
with trustworthiness evaluation of digital engineering artifacts. “Provenance information
is extremely important for determining the value and integrity of a resource” (Berners-
Lee, Hall, Hendler, Shadbolt, & Weitzner, 2006). Buneman, Khanna and Tan (2001) first
proposed “Data Provenance” to address where and why issues in complex data workflow.
Fox and Huang (2003) proposed “Knowledge Provenance” (KP) to address the problem
regarding how to determine the origin and validity of knowledge, by means of modeling
and maintaining information sources, information dependencies, as well as trust
structures. Research on provenance in eScience and scientific workflow has led to a
milestone work “Open Provenance Model” (Moreau et al., 2011); this work was further
developed into PROV ontology (W3C Provenance Working Group, 2013), which can
support modeling provenance for engineering artifacts.
Trust management technology cluster: Enabling to build “Authoritative Source of
Truth” with proper trust mechanisms; enabling access control of digital engineering

Towards Digital Engineering

artifacts stored in AST; enabling trust judgment of digital models and artifacts. Many
access control paradigms have been developed to meet different needs, such as Bell-
LaPadula model (Bell & LaPadula, 1973) based Mandatory Access Control (MAC) (or
Multilevel Security) for military and government entities, Role-Based AC (RBAC)
(Sandhu et al., 1996) for business world, and more recent Attribute-Based AC (Servos &
Osborn, 2017) allowing making more general access policies based on attributes by using
standardized policy language XACML (OASIS, 2013). Some frameworks (Huang &
Nicol, 2012; Huang et al., 2012; Jin et al., 2012) have been proposed to integrate different
models and to meet the new demands of balancing “need-to-know” and “need-to-share”,
thus achieving the DES goal of delivering “the right data to the right person for the right
use at the right time”. Research on using AI to build computational trust in distributed
environment, e.g. (Cho, Chan, & Adali, 2015; Huang, 2018; Huang & Nicol, 2009;
Marsh, 1994) enables to design various trust mechanisms (Huang & Nicol, 2013), from
centralized one with standards and certifications to distributed ones based on evidence,
distributed attribute certifications, and others. The recent arising Blockchain technology
(Wang et al., 2019) enables to verify data integrity in digital engineering, which is an
essential mechanism to assure system security.
High-Performance Computing (HPC), Cloud Computing, and Big Data
technologies: Enabling to store, manage, query, process, mining, analysis, and use a vast
number of digital models and engineering artifacts in a manner of scalable, elastic,
timely, and ubiquitous access; enabling large scale collaborative research and
development across boundaries of disciplines and organizations. Science and engineering
have been more and more depending on computing power; extreme-scale computing
(ASCR, 2016) has become a core capability for competitive advantage. Digital
engineering will depend on computing infrastructures much more than traditional
engineering. Cloud computing (Armbrust et al., 2010), HPC, and the associated Big Data
technologies (NIST, 2018) comprise the computing infrastructures for digital
engineering. In recent years, a trend emerges to combine cloud technologies in scientific
HPC for providing highly dynamic and customized computing support (Asch et al., 2018;
Keahey & Parashar, 2014). Computing infrastructures for digital engineering should
leverage those new developments in computing technologies.

5. A Framework of Digital Systems Engineering
Digital engineering is the destination of digital transformation of engineering. Figure 3
illustrates a high-level abstraction of digital engineering transformation, which is
characterized by (1) digitalization of engineering artifacts; (2) engineering in a digital and
connected environment. There are a variety of engineering artifacts potentially to be
digitalized. Digitalized models will play a central role in digital engineering. One
engineering process will have inputs of digitalized products and services from other
engineering processes in the digital and connected environment and will produce new
digitalized products and services. Digital engineering is enabled and facilitated by many
new digital technologies including IoT, smart CPS, Big Data technologies, AI, machine
learning, digital twin, distributed trust, Blockchain, and others. Among those enabling
technologies, knowledge representation & reasoning (KR&R), ontology engineering and
semantic web, all of which are branches of AI, play a critical role in digital representation
of engineering artifacts particularly digital models. The foundation of KR&R, ontologies,
and formal semantics is formal logic. As a matter of fact, in systems engineering,
conceptualization has an essential but implicit foundation – logic, however, which has not

J. Huang et. al.

received much attention; (Dickerson & Mavris, 2010) is one of very few work addressed
this critical issue. To reflect this, formal logics together with computing science (which is
obviously an essential foundation for digital engineering) are considered as one of the
scientific foundations for digital engineering.

5.1 Core Concepts
First of all, let us clarify and define a small set of core concepts. Sometimes, terms
“digitization” and “digitalization” are used as equivalently, but they have different
meanings. According to Gartner IT Glossary, “Digitization is the process of changing
from analog to digital form” ( “Digitalization
is the use of digital technologies to change a business model and provide new revenue
and value-producing opportunities; it is the process of moving to a digital business.”
( Gartner's definition of digitalization is
from business perspective. Technically, in order to enable using digital technologies, a
digitalized item should be not only computerized but also in a standard form and
annotated with necessary metadata to enable machines of different types to access and
operate automatically. From this perspective, a digitized item can be in a preliminary
digital form and is not fully digitalized. For example, a pure image file in an ad hoc
format is a digitized photo but not digitalized; a digital photo in standardized format with
metadata about the technical parameters used, the device, the time, and the location
where the picture was taken (as the one taken by a digital camera) is digitalized. In
another example, in the case that a physical book was scanned into a computer or directly
typed as text in a computer, we call it “digitized”; in the case that a book was produced as
eBook with attached metadata to allow properly displayed by different reading software
and protected by digital right management software, we call it “digitalized”. Generally,
“digitalize” is beyond “digitize”.

Digitalizing engineering artifacts:

Workforce of (specialty + Digital technologies)

• Models

Digitalized Products&Services

Digitalized Products
(product + digital augmentation)

• Dataset

Digital Engineering

from digital environment

• Documents

Process

Digitalized Services
Natural resources

• Processed natural materials

• Energy

Domain scientific knowledge
+ Formal Logic + Computing Science

Enabling technologies + IoT + Big Data + AI&ML
+Digital Twin +Digital Trust +other digital technologies

• Parts

• Devices

• Products

Digital Transformation
Digitalization of engineering artifacts and enterprises

• Actions

• Process

Workforce of specialty

• Software

Products & services from
other engineering processes

Products (energy, materials, parts,
end products, structures, data, …)

• functions

Engineering

• Services

Process

Services
Natural resources

• Engineering roles

• Enterprise organizations

Domain scientific knowledge Enabling technologies

• …

Figure 3. Digital transformation of engineering

5.1.1 Digitalization
To clearly characterize the difference discussed above, we define “digitalize” as
follows.

Towards Digital Engineering

“Digitalize” is to (1) digitally represent an item or thing in a standard form with well-
defined semantics to make it universally accessible by different types of machines; (2)
assign and maintain an unique identifier to the item or thing; (3) create necessary
metadata in a standard form with well-defined semantics, to enable the use of digital
technologies to manipulate and operate that item or thing automatically; (4) uniquely
associate the unique identifier and the metadata with the item or thing.
The unique association of metadata and a unique identifier with an artifact can be
achieved by using RDID, digital signature, and Blockchain.
There could be different degrees of digitalization, dependent on the degree of fidelity
of the digital representation, the depth of semantic representation, the compatibility of the
representing form, and the richness of metadata, which allow a different extent of digital
operations and interoperations by machines of different types automatically. A digitized
thing can be in the simplest digital form, while a fully digitalized thing with a high degree
of digitalization is in the high end of digital form. The loosely used term “digital xxx”
could be across a broad spectrum from simple to highly digitalized. By leveraging
emerging innovative digital technologies, a digitalized engineering artifact can gain many
new advantages such as enhanced or improved performance, fast and agile integration in
new systems, enabled traceability and accountability, sharing across the boundaries of
organizations and lifecycle activities, and many others.

5.1.2 Unique Identification
Unique identification is a critical part of digitalization because it is a necessary
component for traceability and accountability. (Note that the “traceability” we address
here is not limited to requirement traceability in systems engineering; instead, it is a
general term about tracing information flow, material flow, chain of causality, as well as
chains of faults.) Barcode and RFID are good examples for better understanding the
profound impacts of unique identification.

5.1.3 Digitalized Artifacts and Digital Augmentation
Based on the definition of term “digitalize”, a digitalized artifact consists of the
artifact and its digital augmentation, which consists of (1) digital representation, by
which the artifact is represented in a standard form with well-defined semantics thus
accessible by different types of machines; (2) an identifier, which is uniquely associated
with the artifact to enable traceability and accountability; (3) associated metadata, in a
standard form with well-defined semantics, to enable the use of digital technologies to
manipulate or operate the artifact.
An artifact could be either a digital object such as a model, a dataset, a document, a
picture, and others, or a physical object such as a physical product or a part. For a digital
object, the digital representation of it is the object itself. For a physical object, (1) the
digital representation of that physical object could be as complex as the digital twin of it,
or as simple as just a picture or text description to characterize it; (2) the identifier could
be the barcode or the id code of the RFID tag attached to that physical object; (3) the
associated metadata covers the properties of the object and its digital representation.
Among various engineering artifacts, models are a particularly important one for
digital engineering. In the DoD DES, models will play a crucial role because “digital
representation” of systems of interest is a central theme. We believe digitalized models
will enable to leverage the power of innovative digital technologies maximally. In the

J. Huang et. al.

following, on top of the earlier definition of digitalized artifact, we further conceptualize
“digitalized model” with different aspects of metadata.

5.1.4 Digitalized Models
A digitalized model is composed of a model and its digital augmentation, which
consists of (1) the digital representation of the model, which is actually the model itself,
if the model is in a digital form; (2) a unique identifier associated with the model to
enable traceability and accountability; (3) associated metadata, in a standard form with
well-defined semantics, to enable to use or interact with the model by engineering
systems using digital technologies. More specifically, the metadata about the properties
of the model include possibly:

•
Generic attributes, such as model name, version, date of creation, type of the
model, and others;
•
Description of inputs, outputs, and parameters;
•
Provenance of the model, such as, who created the model, when the model was
created, why the model was created (purpose), where the model was developed
and tested (computing environments), what the model depends on (dependence
relations to other models, datasets, documents, and others ), the revision history
of the model, and others;
•
Model utilization guide about how and where the model can be viewed,
executed, or used.
•
A set of security properties about the model such as check sum (hash code),
security label, digital signatures, various certificates, and others.
•
A set of machine-processible access control policies, to enable an external guard
system to enforce the specified policies, or a self-contained access control
software module to protect the model.

The models that can be digitalized include all types of models, no matter they are
mathematical models in print or in a digital form, logic models (a subset of mathematical
models, e.g., in First Order Logic, modal logic, temporal logic, and others), an executable
model represented with a programing language, an engineering design, a conceptual
graphic model (e.g., flowcharts), or others.
The term “standard” means to follow precisely defined syntax and semantics, which
are commonly shared by a community. Therefore, a “standard” form could be a form that
is complying with a set of officially issued standards or with ontologies commonly used
in a community.
An officially issued standard represents a centralized approach, which is highly
efficient at least in the short term, but maybe a sub-optimized solution representing a
local optimum from long term view. Ontologies represent a decentralized or distributed
crowdsourcing evolutionary and fine-grained level of standardization approach; a concept
may be formalized and published as several ontologies by several participants, but the
one that is mostly reused by others becomes de facto “standard”. A concept is typically
defined on top of other concepts, so the evolution of ontologies represents a fine-grained
“standardization” process. For short term, the use of ontologies is not efficient as a
standard does, as ontology mapping is usually needed and sometimes can be complicated
and inefficient; for the long term, the use of ontologies leverages collective intelligence,
incentivizes innovation, and allows evolutionary revision in micro-level of a “standard”.

Towards Digital Engineering

When a set of related ontologies become mature, they can be adopted and issued as an
official standard by an authority for a community.
To build the digital augmentations for models, we need to investigate and understand
the relevant properties of different types of models and their logical relations. We need to
use knowledge representation to explicitly model and represent those properties and
relations. We call this type of models as “model of models”. The study of “model of
models” is a foundation for developing ontologies used to express the digital
augmentations for models.

5.2 Overarching Goal and Focusing Areas
The US DoD digital engineering strategy presents a profound vision for the emerging
digital engineering, specific to the engineering practice of the DoD enterprise; the
strategy is also inspiring to the development of digital systems engineering as an
academic research field to develop corresponding scientific knowledge and technology to
support the proposed digital engineering transformation. In this section, we attempt to
draft a general framework for digital systems engineering in the global context of digital
transformation, Industry 4.0, and Data Science. The development of digital systems
engineering will support the implementation of the DoD DES as well as digital
engineering in general with knowledge, methodologies, technologies, as well as training
and education for the workforce.
The core of digital systems engineering is digitalization. The broader overarching
goal of digital systems engineering is to develop the principles, theories, methodologies,
methods, models, and technologies for the digitalization of engineering and for systems
engineering in the digitalized and connected engineering and operating environments.
The immediate targets of digital systems engineering are the digitalization of
engineering artifacts, information and model sharing, and the associated issues of digital
trust, big data, automatic machine-processing, and machine learning arising from the
digitalized and connected environment.
Digital systems engineering first needs to digitalize a variety of engineering artifacts,
such as models, data, materials, products, services, processes, enterprise, and others. As
part of digitalization, unique identification plays a critical role to enable accountability
and traceability (for tracing information flow, material flow, faulty chain, supply chain,
and others). A central task is to develop digital augmentation for each engineering artifact
with well-defined semantics, thus enabling the use of digital technologies to manipulate,
operate, or interact with those engineering artifacts.
If digitalization is a mean to enable rich information for digital engineering, we also
need to effectively and efficiently deal with those big data. In a digitalized and connected
environment, every phase of systems engineering lifecycle will face unprecedented rich
information; it is a great challenge regarding how to leverage those big data, which is
another focusing theme of digital systems engineering. On this matter, two research
issues need immediate attention. First, how should the big data be handled in digital
engineering? How can we leverage Data Science to gain insights from those big data in
the domain of digital engineering? Secondly, given the distributed nature of data in the
digitalized and connected environment, the trustworthiness of digitalized engineering
artifacts (including models) is a critical issue. What digital trust mechanisms will be
needed?
To address the above research issues, digital systems engineering needs to integrate
and leverage digital technologies such as Big Data technologies (including cloud
computing), Data Science, ML, AI, semantics technologies, as well as digital

J. Huang et. al.

mechanisms of security and trust developed in cybersecurity, Blockchain, and
computational trust communities.
Regarding disciplinary relations, “Digital Engineering” is generally engineering
practice in the digitalized and connected environment to leverage digital technologies.
Digital systems engineering is an academic research field to develop corresponding
scientific knowledge and technology to support digital engineering practice. From the
perspective of digital transformation, digital systems engineering is the digitalization of
systems engineering; from the perspective of data science, digital systems engineering is
an extension of data science applied to systems engineering. Digital systems engineering
is a new development of systems engineering by leveraging digital technologies; as a
subfield of SE, digital systems engineering is guided by systems thinking, systems
approach, and SE principles and methodologies. Within the domain of SE, digital
systems engineering is highly relevant to an active research area -- model-based systems
engineering (Estefan, 2007; Madni & Sievers, 2018). According to INCOSE’s definition,
“Model-based systems engineering (MBSE) is the formalized application of modeling to
support system requirements, design, analysis, verification and validation activities
beginning in the conceptual design phase and continuing throughout development and
later life cycle phases” (INCOSE, 2007). The central goal of MBSE is to transform the
traditional document-centric approaches to systems engineering into model-centric
approaches, thus overcoming the deficiencies of the former (INCOSE, 2007; Madni and
Sievers, 2018). As stated earlier in this section, the core of digital systems engineering is
digitalization. Digital systems engineering focuses on digitalization (including unique
identification) of engineering artifacts, as well as associated big data and distributed trust
issues in digital engineering. Digitalization enables machine-processable
(understandable) digitalized artifacts and digitalized engineering processes, thus enabling
adopting, infusing, or integrating new digital technologies rapidly and smoothly; unique
identification (as a part of digitalization) enables information traceability and
accountability in systems lifecycle. Digital systems engineering works together with
MBSE to support digital engineering. The relation stated above can be illustrated in
figure 4. Digital systems engineering also supports System of Systems Engineering (C.
Keating et al., 2003) and Mission Engineering (Gold, 2016; Sousa-Poza, 2015) with
enriched information for complex system governance (C. B. Keating & Katina, 2019) and
systems coordination and planning.

Digital Engineering

Digitalization &
Unique identification;
Big Data & Digital Trust

Transformation of
document-centric SE to
model-centric approaches

Digital
Systems Engineering
Model-Based
Systems Engineering

Systems Thinking

&
Systems Approach

(Classical)
Systems Engineering

Fig. 4. Relations between digital systems engineering and MBSE as well as classical SE.

Towards Digital Engineering

From the perspective to realize the digital engineering vision, the knowledge and
research areas of digital systems engineering can be organized in four levels: vision,
strategy, action, and foundation, as illustrated in figure 5.

Vision of Digital Engineering (DE)
• Needs analysis
• Goals (targeted advantages to achieve)

Level 1:
Vision

Level 2:
Strategy

Transformation: Practice

Transformation:
Workforce

Embracing innovative digital technologies in
DE operations

Transformation:
DE Infrastructure

Engineering -> Digital Engineering

Digitalization of artifacts

SE lifecycle activities with
digitalized artifacts

Digitalized asset usage

Innovative applications with digital
technologies

Level 3:
Action

•
Creation

(Creating digital augment)

•
Conceptualization

•
Curation

•
Digital representation

•
AI-aided systems design

•
Development

×

•
Qualification

•
Unique identification

•
Autonomous factory

•
Production

•
Governance

•
Metadata on properties
and security

•
Autonomous transportation systems

•
Deployment & sustainment

•
Sharing

•
Standard form with well-
defined semantics

• …

•
Retirement

•
Utilization

Leverage Enabling Digital Technologies for DE

Level 4:
Foundation

Big Data (BD) & ML in
digitalized & connected
environment

Foundations for
Digitalization

Cybersecurity technologies

Digital mechanisms of trust

•
Access control of digitalized
engineering artifacts

•
Centralized, e.g. AST

•
Model of models

•
Cloud Platforms for BD in DE

•
Decentralized, e.g. multi-AST

•
Engineering computing integrity

•
Provenance models

•
BD manipulation for DE

•
Ontology engineering

•
Blockchain-based mechanisms

•
Distributed, e.g. Blockchain-
based

•
Data-intensive Systems
Engineering

•
Knowledge Representation &
Reasoning

•
Identity & attribute
management

•
BD analytics & ML for
knowledge discovery

•
Hybrid

•
Standardization approaches

•
…

Figure 5. Knowledge and Research Areas of Digital Systems Engineering

5.2.1 Vision Level

Vision of Digital Engineering: Digital systems engineering aims to develop means
towards digital engineering; therefore, it is crucial to have a clear vision of digital
engineering. The US DoD DES is an insightful vision but specific to DoD enterprise. It is
important to explore the vision of digital engineering in general, i.e. engineering in the
coming digital age. Research areas for this purpose include:

•
Needs analysis

o
Features of fast-changing engineering and business environment
o
Deficiencies of current engineering practice
o
Conceptualization (envisioned future digital engineering)
o
Gap analysis
o
Enabling technologies
o
Feasibility study
•
Goals of digital engineering (the targeted advantages to achieve)

5.2.2 Strategy Level
At strategy-level, we identify four strategic moves.
Transformation of engineering practice: In digital engineering transformation, the
central task is the digitalization of engineering artifacts, which will be discussed later.

J. Huang et. al.

Transformation of education and workforce development: Human is the essential
force to advance engineering; therefore, workforce development and education
transformation towards digital engineering are necessary. There are two related aspects:

•
Education and training with knowledge and skills for digital engineering
•
AI-powered innovative learning & training systems in digital engineering
environment

Transformation of engineering infrastructure: To facilitate digital engineering, it is
also necessary to develop digital engineering infrastructure for meeting the demands from
Big Data, security, and distributed nature of a digital & connected environment.

•
Cloud-based platforms for digital engineering
•
Digital mechanisms of trust and security for digital engineering

Embracing innovative digital technologies in digital engineering operations:
After realizing digital engineering, an enterprise is able to take full advantages of
digitalization by fast adopting, interacting, and/or integrating with emerging innovative
digital technologies, thus achieving fast design, delivery, and sustainment of agile
intelligent and complex systems in fast changing environment.

5.2.3 Action Level
At action-level, there are many research areas, roughly organized in four groups.
Digitalization of engineering artifacts: Towards digital engineering, it is a critical
step to investigate how to digitalize engineering artifacts, potentially including various
models (formal or informal, numeric or logical, abstract or physical), datasets, various
documents, bills of materials, processed natural materials, energy, parts, devices,
products, actions, process, software, functions, services, engineering roles, enterprise
organizations, and others. In the digitalization, unique identification plays a critical role
to enable accountability and information traceability (for tracing information flow,
material flow, faulty chain, supply chain, and others). To digitalize engineering artifacts,
a digital augmentation will be developed for each artifact, as discussed in subsection 5.1.

Operations of digitalized engineering artifacts: Once the means to digitalize
engineering artifacts is created, digital engineering practice will need to explore the
technologies regarding the following operational aspects of digital engineering artifacts:

•
Creation (manual and automatic approaches)
•
Curation (store, organization, query, retrieval, change, upgrade, …)
•
Qualification (consistency, validity, completeness, usability, accessibility, …)
•
Governance (policies of access, sharing, security, intellectual properties, …)
•
Sharing (information flow across organizations and lifecycle activities)
•
Utilization
Each type of digitalized engineering artifacts has different features and needs further
studies to look into them individually. Given the critical role of models in digital
engineering, digitalized models need immediate attention. Some interesting research
areas include but not limited to:

•
Automatic generation of digital augmentations for models by machine in an
Integrated Development Environment for system design
•
Digitalized model creation in a digital environment with a large number of
relevant digitalized artifacts

Towards Digital Engineering

•
Digitalized model creation by integrating a set of existing digitalized models for
its components
•
Digitalized model creation by big data analytics and machine learning
•
Digitalized model verification and validation
•
Digitalized model curation
•
Digitalized model sharing

o
Sharing across engineering stages or lifecycle phases
o
Sharing across boundaries of disciplines and organizations
o
Digitalized model update and propagation
•
Digitalized model repeatability and reusability
•
Digitalized model interpretability
•
Digitalized model usability
•
Digitalized model interoperability
•
Digitalized model trustworthiness evaluation
•
Digitalized model access control
•
Digitalized model and intellectual property protection
•
Digitalized model security and risk analysis

Systems engineering lifecycle activities with digitalized engineering artifacts:
Every phase of SE lifecycle will involve operations of digitalized engineering artifacts
discussed above and will have and need to investigate how to leverage unprecedented
information from the digitalized engineering artifacts of upstream lifecycle phases, from
historical observations of the same or similar work in downstream of lifecycle, and from
a digital connected environment. Research issues appear in every combination of each
digital artifact operation type and each SE lifecycle activity, similar to figure 6, which
illustrates digitalized model operations vs systems engineering lifecycle phases in a
digitalized environment.

Concept
Stage

Development
Stage

Production
Stage

Utilization/support
Stage

Retirement
Stage

Model
creation.

Inputs:
- Digital artifacts (DAs)
in operating environment;
- Relevant data and
models from downstream
stages.

Inputs:
- Digital artifacts from
both upstream and
downstream;
- Digital artifacts of
external systems

Inputs:
- Digital artifacts from
both upstream and
downstream;
- and from production
environment.

Inputs:
- Digital artifacts from
both upstream and
downstream;
- and from operating
environment.

Inputs:
- Digital artifacts
from upstream;
- and from natural
environment.

Model learning
Apply AI&ML for model building from big data coming from upstream and downstream engineering stages and environment.

Model integration
Interaction between
digital models for both
SysCon and systems in
operating environment.

Interaction between
digital models for both
system components and
external systems.

Interaction between
digital models for both
the system and
systems in production
environment.

Interaction between digital
models for both the system
and external systems in
operating environment.

Interaction between
digital models for the
sys component and
DAs in natural
environment.

Model curation
Create model of models; maintain metadata for models; maintain model provenance; model update and propagation to downstream.

Model
sharing & use
Across lifecycle activities,; across the boundaries of disciplines and organizations

Model
Trustworthiness

Centralized standardization; decentralized standardization and mappings; distributed evolutionary fine-grained convergence;
model trustworthiness; model repeatability; Access Control; digital artifact intellectual property protection, …

Figure 6. Operations of models in systems engineering lifecycle within a digitalized and

connected environment.

J. Huang et. al.

Innovative applications with digital technologies: Digitalized engineering practice
will enable to gain the advantages of many digital technologies and develop innovative
applications. Number a few as follows.

•
AI-aided systems design
•
Autonomous factory
•
Autonomous transportation systems
•
…
There are many potential innovative applications. We briefly discuss systems design with
digitalized engineering artifacts. There could be several levels of automation. At a basic
level, a digitalized model can be just an engineering diagram for human users, wrapped
with metadata about the diagram; following the information given in its metadata, the
diagram can be displayed with the required software. At a middle level of formalism, a
digitalized model can be an executable formal model; following the associated metadata,
the formal model can be executed in an environment such as a container (a modern
approach of virtualization in computing); the origin and the evolution history of the
model can be traced; the dependency relations of the model can be traced. At an
advanced level, in addition to what stated above, some examples of the capabilities
include: (a) using the metadata, a digitalized model can be verified and validated by
machines, e.g., using a model checker or a theorem prover to prove the validity of a logic
model. (b) Some types of faults in a model can also be possibly found by machine
automatically. (c) Based on the properties of a set of digitalized models, they are
integrated by human modelers to construct a model for a system; At highest level, by
using AI, a machine can autonomously construct a model on top of available digitalized
artifacts; a machine can autonomously improve a digitalized system’s structure and
behaviors.
It is a strategic goal of digital engineering to leverage innovative digital technologies,
such as IoT, CPS, Big Data technologies, Data Science, AI (including ML, KR&R,
ontologies, Semantic Web), Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), digital twin
and digital thread, 3D printing, modeling and simulation (M&S), cybersecurity,
distributed trust, Blockchain, and others. In the history of engineering, CAD has largely
digitalized engineering drawing and the detail physical design. Combining with VR&AR
and M&S, CAD is moving towards digital twins. No doubt there will be many innovative
applications by combining digital engineering with other emerging digital technologies.

5.2.4 Foundation Level
At foundation-level, we identify several groups of foundational research areas and
enabling digital technologies for digital engineering.
Foundation for digitalization: The main foundation of digitalization is from AI,
more specifically, knowledge representation & reasoning (KR&R) and semantics
technology developed from ontology engineering and Semantic Web communities.
Foundational research areas include:

•
Model of models, to categorize models and to create logic model for
representing each category of models' properties and their relations.
•
Provenance modeling, to create logic models for representing the origin and the
dependency relations of engineering artifacts.
•
Ontologies for expressing the digital augmentations with well-defined
semantics, thus enabling or enhancing model integration, model repeatability

Towards Digital Engineering

and model reusability, model curation and sharing across engineering stages and
across the boundaries of disciplines, teams, and organizations.
•
Standardization in digitalization

o
Centralized standardization
o
Decentralized standardization and mappings
o
Distributed fine-grained evolutionary convergence with ontologies

Digital mechanisms of trust: Given the distributed nature of digitalized and
connected engineering environment, the trustworthiness of digitalized engineering
artifacts (particularly models) is a critical issue. What digital mechanisms of trust will be
needed? The US DoD’s “Authoritative Source of Trust” (AST) is a centralized solution;
what specific mechanisms of trust need to be used in the AST? How other distributed
digital trust mechanisms can be incorporated in AST? Interesting mechanism types
include:

•
Centralized mechanisms, e.g. US DOD’s AST
•
Decentralized mechanisms, e.g. multiple ASTs in different domains with certain
structures such as hierarchical and mesh as for PKIs (Huang & Nicol, 2009).
•
Distributed mechanisms, e.g. using digital signature, distributed key certification
and attribute certification, evidence-based trust, and blockchain.
•
Hybrid mechanisms.

Cybersecurity technologies cluster: It is of paramount importance to ensure the
security of digital engineering and digital enterprises. Worrying failure in cybersecurity
can be a factor to block digital engineering transformation. There are many interesting
research areas to support the security of digital engineering, just numbering a few,

•
Access control of digitalized engineering artifacts
•
Engineering computing integrity in a distributed digital engineering environment
•
Identity and attributes management in digital engineering
•
Blockchains-based distributed mechanisms of trust and security
•
Intrusion detection in a distributed digital engineering environment
•
…
Cybersecurity in digital engineering will be discussed in another paper.

Big Data and Machine Learning cluster: In the digitalized and connected
environment, given those unprecedented big data characterized by volume, velocity,
variety, veracity, and views (Huang, 2018), how do we design and build trustworthy AI
systems and ML models and algorithms for knowledge discovery from big data to ensure
reliable performance, explainability, safety, security, resilience, scientific computing
integrity in digital engineering? Some foundational research areas in this cluster include:

•
Cloud platforms for big data in digital engineering
•
Big data manipulation for digital engineering
•
Big data analytics and machine learning for knowledge discovery from
observations of the system and its environment in digital engineering
•
Data-intensive Systems Engineering (SE combined with insights and findings
discovered from data through big data analytics and machine learning)

We have discussed some knowledge and research areas broadly in four levels from
vision, strategy, action, to foundation, as illustrated in figure 5. No doubt, many other

J. Huang et. al.

interesting and important areas were not reflected in the figure for limited space. Some
examples are:

•
Human-machine interaction in a digitalized connected environment
•
Team collaboration in a digitalized connected environment
•
Parts recycle & reuse evaluation in a digitalized connected environment
•
Environment impact analysis in a digitalized connected environment.

6. Concluding Remarks
“Digital engineering will require new methods, processes, and tools” (US DoD, 2018).
To support the digital engineering strategy, digital systems engineering is emerging as an
academic field, which aims at developing theory, methods, models, and tools to support
digital engineering practice in the emerging digitalize and connected environment. For
that end, in this paper, we (1) analyzed the transformation from traditional engineering to
digital engineering (figure 3); (2) clarified and defined a small set of core concepts
including digitalization, digitalized artifacts, digital augmentation, and digitalized
models; (3) presented a big picture of digital systems engineering in four levels: vision,
strategy, action, and foundation (figure 5), and discussed each of identified main areas of
research issues. A critical task towards digital engineering is to digitalize engineering
artifacts, including models, datasets, products, functions, services, and SE processes.
Digitalization enables universally machine-processable (understandable) digital
engineering artifacts and processes, thus enabling rapid infusing and leveraging
innovative digital technologies; as a part of digitalization, unique identification plays a
critical role to enable information traceability and accountability in systems lifecycle. In
the digital engineering information flow, provenance also plays critical role in enabling
tracing the dependency relations among engineering artifacts and improving model
reproducibility and replicability.
This paper presented our vision on digital systems engineering, and much work is
ahead in that direction. Numbering a few, we will explore the ontological approach to
digitalizing engineering artifacts with higher priority, developing model of models for
digitalizing models, and developing provenance representation and reasoning models. We
will research the distributed digital trust mechanisms for digital identity and attribute
management and for digital engineering artifacts sharing in more general engineering
collaboration in today's business environment. We will explore data-intensive systems
engineering approach by researching trustworthy AI systems and ML models and
algorithms for knowledge discovery from big data to ensure reliable performance,
explainability, safety, security, resilience, scientific computing integrity in digital
engineering.
The development of digital systems engineering will support the implementation of
DoD DES as well as digital engineering in general with the needed knowledge, methods,
technologies, as well as training and education for the workforces.

Acknowledgment
This work is partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant CNS-
1828593. This paper is a revision and further development of our earlier white paper on
digital systems engineering (Huang et al., 2019).

Towards Digital Engineering

References
Adams, S., Arel, I., Bach, J., Coop, R., Furlan, R., Goertzel, B., … Sowa, J. (2012). Mapping the Landscape of

Human-Level Artificial General Intelligence. AI Magazine, 33(1), 25–42.

Armbrust, M., Fox, A., Griffith, R., Joseph, A. D., Katz, R., Konwinski, A., … Zaharia, M. (2010). A View of

Cloud Computing. Commun. ACM, 53(4), 50–58.
Asch, M., Moore, T., Badia, R., Beck, M., Beckman, P., Bidot, T., … Deelman, E. (2018). Big data and

extreme-scale computing: Pathways to convergence-toward a shaping strategy for a future software and
data ecosystem for scientific inquiry. The International Journal of High Performance Computing
Applications, 32(4), 435–479.
ASCR. (2016). Advanced Scientific Computing Research Exascale Requirements Review. DOE Office of

Science.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The internet of things: A survey. Computer Networks, 54(15),

2787–2805.
Baclawski, K., Bennett, M., Berg-Cross, G., Fritzsche, D., Schneider, T., Sharma, R., … Westerinen, A. (2018).

Ontology Summit 2017 communiqué–AI, learning, reasoning and ontologies. Applied Ontology, 13(1),
3–18.
Baker, M. (2016). 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature, 533(7604), 452–454.


BBC. (2020). Nobel Prize-winning scientist Frances Arnold retracts paper.
Bell, D. E., & LaPadula, L. J. (1973). Secure Computer Systems: A Mathematical Model. Volume II.
Berners-Lee, T., Hall, W., Hendler, J. A., Shadbolt, K. O. and N., & Weitzner, D. J. (2006). A Framework for

Web Science. Foundations and Trends in Web Science, 1(1), 1–130.
Buneman, P., Khanna, S., & Tan, W. (2001). Why and Where: A Characterization of Data Provenance.

Proceedings of International Conference on Database Theory (ICDT), 316–330.
Chen, D., Doumeingts, G., & Vernadat, F. (2008). Architectures for enterprise integration and interoperability:

Past, present and future. Computers in Industry, 59(7), 647–659.
Cho, J.-H., Chan, K., & Adali, S. (2015). A survey on trust modeling. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 48(2),

28.
Dickerson, C., & Mavris, D. N. (2010). Architecture and principles of systems engineering. CRC Press.
Estefan, J. A. (2007). Survey of model-based systems engineering (MBSE) methodologies. Incose MBSE Focus

Group, 25(8), 1–12.
Fox, M. S., & Huang, J. (2003). Knowledge Provenance. The 2nd International Semantic Web Conference.

Florida.
Fox, M. S., & Huang, J. (2005). Knowledge Provenance in Enterprise Information. Int. J. of Production

Research, 43(20), 4471–4492.
Fritzsche, D., Gruninger, M., Baclawski, K., Bennett, M., Berg-Cross, G., Schneider, T., … Westerinen, A.

(2017). Ontology Summit 2016 Communique: Ontologies within semantic interoperability ecosystems.
Applied Ontology, 12(2), 91–111.
Glaessgen, E., & Stargel, D. (2012). The digital twin paradigm for future NASA and US Air Force vehicles.

53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference 20th
AIAA/ASME/AHS Adaptive Structures Conference 14th AIAA, 1818.
Gold, R. (2016). Mission engineering. 19th Annual NDIA Systems Engineering Conference. Springfield, VA.
Goranson, H. T. (2002). ICEIMT: History and Challenges. International Conference on Enterprise Integration

and Modeling Technology, 7–14.
Gruber, T. R. (1993). A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications. KSL-92-71, Knowledge

Systems Laboratory, Stanford University.
GTAI. (2014). Industrie4.0 Smart-Manufacturing For The Future.
Handley, H. A. H. (2019). The Human Viewpoint for System Architectures (Vol. 35). Springer.
Hey, T., Tansley, S., & Tolle, K. M. (2009). The fourth paradigm: data-intensive scientific discovery. Microsoft

Research.
Huang, J. (2018). From big data to knowledge: Issues of provenance, trust, and scientific computing integrity.

2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2197–2205.
Huang, J., Handley, H., Pazos-lago, P., Pinto, A., Kovacic, S., Collins, A., … Daniels, C. (2019). Digital

Systems Engineering : Concepts , Challenges and Enabling Technologies. Retrieved from

ges_and_Enabling_Technologies
Huang, J., & Nicol, D. (2009). A Calculus of Trust and Its Application to PKI and Identity Management.

Proceedings of IDTrust’09, ACM Digital Library,
Http://Portal.Acm.Org/Citation.Cfm?Id=1527017.1527021.
Huang, J., & Nicol, D. (2012). Security and provenance in M3GS for cross-domain information sharing.

J. Huang et. al.

MILCOM’12 - IEEE Military Communications Conference, 1–6. IEEE.
Huang, J., & Nicol, D. M. (2013). Trust mechanisms for cloud computing. Journal of Cloud Computing, 2(1).

Retrieved from
Huang, J., Nicol, D. M., Bobba, R., & Huh, J. H. (2012). A framework integrating attribute-based policies into

role-based access control. Proceedings of the 17th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and
Technologies, 187–196.
Huang, J., Seck, M. D., & Gheorghe, A. (2016). Towards trustworthy smart cyber-physical-social systems in

the era of internet of things. Proceedings of 11th IEEE System of Systems Engineering Conference
(SoSE).
IEEE. (2015). Towards a definition of the Internet of Things (IoT). Retrieved from

MAY15.pdf
INCOSE. (2007). Systems Engineering Vision 2020.
Jin, X., Sandhu, R., & Krishnan, R. (2012). RABAC: role-centric attribute-based access control. International

Conference on Mathematical Methods, Models, and Architectures for Computer Network Security, 84–
96.
Katina, P. F., Keating, C. B., Sisti, J. A., & Gheorghe, A. V. (2019). Blockchain governance. International

Journal of Critical Infrastructures, 15(2), 121–135.
Keahey, K., & Parashar, M. (2014). Enabling On-Demand Science via Cloud Computing. IEEE Cloud

Computing, 1(1), 21–27.
Keating, C. B., & Katina, P. F. (2019). Complex system governance: Concept, utility, and challenges. Systems

Research and Behavioral Science, 36(5), 687–705.
Keating, C., Rogers, R., Unal, R., Dryer, D., Sousa-Poza, A., Safford, R., … Rabadi, G. (2003). System of

systems engineering. Engineering Management Journal, 15(3), 36–45.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436.
Madni, A. M., & Sievers, M. (2018). Model-based systems engineering: Motivation, current status, and research

opportunities. Systems Engineering, 21(3), 172–190.
Marsh, S. P. (1994). Formalising Trust as a Computational Concept. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Stirling.
Moreau, L., Clifford, B., Freire, J., Futrelle, J., Gil, Y., Groth, P., … Plale, B. (2011). The open provenance

model core specification (v1. 1). Future Generation Computer Systems, 27(6), 743–756.
Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” org/bitcoin. pdf.
Nature. (2018). Challenges in irreproducible research. Nature. Retrieved from


NIST. (2015). NIST Big Data Interoperability Framework: Volume 1, Big Data Definitions.
NIST. (2018). NIST Big Data Interoperability Framework: Volume 7, Big Data Standards Roadmap.
NSF_SBE_AC. (2015). Reproducibility, Replicabbility, and Generlization in The Social, Behavioral, and

Economic Sciences. Retrieved from

y_SubcommitteeMay_2015.pdf
OASIS. (2013, January). eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) Version 3.0. OASISStandard.
Peisert, S., Cybenko, G., & Jajodia, S. (2015). ASCR Cybersecurity for Scientific Computing Integrity, DOE

Workshop Report, January 7-9, 2015, Rockville, MD. DOE Office of Science.
Pinto, A. C., Garvey, P. R., Keating, C. B., Unal, R., Ariel Pinto, C., Garvey, P. R., … Unal, R. (2009). FDNA

approach to risk-informed conceptualization and design of system dependencies. 30th Annual National
Conference of the American Society for Engineering Management 2009, ASEM 2009, 431–438.
Powell, A. W., & Pazos, P. (2017). Building high-performing autonomous teams in complex manufacturing

settings: A naturalistic research approach. Engineering Management Journal, 29(3), 206–219.
Sandhu, R. S., Coyne, E. J., Feinstein, H. L., & Youman, C. E. (1996). Role-based access control models.

Computer, 29(2), 38–47.
Schwab, K. (2017). The fourth industrial revolution. Currency.
Servos, D., & Osborn, S. L. (2017). Current research and open problems in attribute-based access control. ACM

Computing Surveys (CSUR), 49(4), 65.
Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., … others. (2018). A general

reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play. Science,
362(6419), 1140–1144.
Sisinni, E., Saifullah, A., Han, S., Jennehag, U., & Gidlund, M. (2018). Industrial Internet of Things:

Challenges, Opportunities, and Directions. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 14(11), 4724–
4734.
Sousa-Poza, A. (2015). Mission Engineering. International Journal of System of Systems Engineering, 6(3),

161–185.
Stanford. (2016). Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030, One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence:

Report of the 2015-2016 Study Panel, Stanford University.

Towards Digital Engineering

Studer, R., Benjamins, V. R., & Fensel, D. (1998). Knowledge engineering: principles and methods. Data &

Knowledge Engineering, 25(1–2), 161–197.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press.
Tao, F., Cheng, J., Qi, Q., Zhang, M., Zhang, H., & Sui, F. (2018). Digital twin-driven product design,

manufacturing and service with big data. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 94(9–12), 3563–3576.
US DoD. (2018, June). Digital Engineering Strategy, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Dense for

Systems Engineering.
US NSTC. (2016). Preparing for The Future of Artificial Intelligence.
US NSTC. (2019). The national artificial intelligence research and development strategy plan: 2019 update.
W3C Provenance Working Group. (2013, April). PROV Overview: An Overview of the PROV Family of

Documents.
Wang, X., Zha, X., Ni, W., Liu, R. P., Guo, Y. J., Niu, X., & Zheng, K. (2019). Survey on blockchain for

Internet of Things. Computer Communications.
White House. A National Strategic Plan for Advanced Manufacturing. , (2012).
White House. Strategy for American Leadership in Advanced Manufacturing. , (2018).
Xu, L. Da, Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. International Journal of

Production Research, 56(8), 2941–2962.
Xu, H., Yu, W., Griffith, D., & Golmie, N. (2018). A Survey on Industrial Internet of Things: A Cyber-Physical

Systems Perspective. IEEE Access, 6, 78238–78259.