A Demonstration of Issues with Value-Based Multiobjective
Reinforcement Learning Under Stochastic State Transitions

Peter Vamplew
Federation University Australia
Mt Helen, Victoria, Australia

Cameron Foale
Federation University Australia
Mt Helen, Victoria, Australia

Richard Dazeley
Deakin University
Waurn Ponds, Victoria, Australia

ABSTRACT

true utility. As a result numerous non-linear scalarisation functions
have been explored in the literature (for example, [4, 23, 24]) –
these tend to produce algorithmic complications, but also may
better represent the true preferences of the user.
As well as the choice of scalarisation function and parameters, a
second factor must be considered within this utility-based paradigm
– the time-frame over which the utility is being maximised. Roijers
et al. [12] identified two distinct possibilities. The agent may aim to
maximise the expected scalarised return (ESR). That is, it is assumed
the returns are first scalarised, and then this agent aims for the
policy which maximises the expected value of that scalar. This
ESR approach is suited to problems where the aim is to maximise
the expected outcome within any individual episode. For example,
when producing a treatment plan for a patient which trades off the
likelihood of a cure versus the extent of negative side-effects - any
individual patient will only undergo this treatment once, and so
they care about the utility obtained within that specific episode.
In other contexts we may be concerned about the mean utility
received over multiple episodes. In this situation the agent should
aim to maximise the scalarised expected return (SER) - that is, it
estimates the expected vector return per episode, and then max-
imises the scalarisation of that expected return. As demonstrated
in Roijers et al. [11], the optimal policy for a particular MOMDP
under the ESR and SER setting may differ considerably, even if the
same scalarisation function and parameters are used in both cases.
As noted by Roijers et al. [11] and Rădulescu et al. [10] much
of the existing work in MORL has considered SER optimization,
although this has often been implicit rather than explicitly stated.
Much of this SER-focused work has been based on benchmark
environments such as those of Vamplew et al. [18], the majority of
which are deterministic MOMDPs.
In this paper we demonstrate by example that the model-free
value-based methods previously widely used in MORL research
may fail to maximise the SER utility when applied to MOMDPs
with stochastic state transitions.

We report a previously unidentified issue with model-free, value-
based approaches to multiobjective reinforcement learning in the
context of environments with stochastic state transitions. An ex-
ample multiobjective Markov Decision Process (MOMDP) is used
to demonstrate that under such conditions these approaches may
be unable to discover the policy which maximises the Scalarised
Expected Return, and in fact may converge to a Pareto-dominated
solution. We discuss several alternative methods which may be
more suitable for maximising SER in MOMDPs with stochastic
transitions.

arXiv:2004.06277v1 [cs.LG] 14 Apr 2020

KEYWORDS

multiobjective reinforcement learning, multiobjective MDPs, sto-
chastic MDPs

1
INTRODUCTION

Multiobjective reinforcement learning (MORL) aims to extend the
capabilities of reinforcement learning (RL) methods to enable them
to work for problems with multiple, conflicting objectives [12].
RL algorithms generally assume that the environment is a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) in which the agent is provided with a scalar
reward after each action, and must aim to learn the policy which
maximises the long-term return based on those rewards. In contrast
MORL algorithms operate within multiobjective MDPs (MOMDPs),
in which the reward terms are vectors, with each element in the
vector corresponding to a different objective. This creates a number
of new issues to be addressed by the MORL agent. Most notably
there may be multiple policies which may be optimal (in terms of
Pareto optimality), and which policy the agent should learn is not
immediately obvious.
In the utility-based paradigm of MORL [12, 29] it is assumed that
the preferences of the user can be defined in terms of a parame-
terised utility function f , and that the aim of the agent should be to
learn the policy which produces vector returns which maximises
the utility to the user as defined by f .
Various approaches have been explored for the form of the utility
function – some may be better suited to express the preference of
the user within a particular problem domain, while others offer
benefits from an algorithmic perspective. A simple weighted linear
scalarisation has been widely used because of its simplicity (for
example, [1, 3, 8]). Linear scalarisation transforms an MOMDP
into an equivalent single-objective MDP, and enables existing RL
approaches to be directly applied [12]. However for many tasks this
may not be able to accurately represent the utility of the user, and so
may fail to discover the policy which is optimal with regards to their

2
SPACE TRADERS: AN EXAMPLE
STOCHASTIC MOMDP

As shown in Figure 1 the Space Traders MOMDP is a finite-horizon
task with a horizon of 2 time-steps. It consists of two non-terminal
states, with three actions available in each state. The agent starts at
its home planet (state A) and must travel to another planet (state B)
to deliver a shipment, and then return to State A with the payment.
The agent receives a reward with two elements - the first is 0 on all
actions, except that a reward of 1 is received when the agent suc-
cessfully returns to state A, while the second element is a negative
value reflecting the time taken to execute the action.

p=1.0; r=(0,‐12)

p=1.0; r=(1,‐10)

p=0.1; r=(0,‐1)

p=0.9; r=(0,‐6)

A
B

p=0.9; r=(1,‐8)

p=0.1; r=(0,‐7)

p=0.85; r=(0,0)
p=0.15; r=(0,0)

p=0.15; r=(0,0)

p=0.85; r=(1,0)

Figure 1: The Space Traders MOMDP. Solid black lines show the Direct actions, solid grey lines show the Indirect actions, and
dashed lines indicate Teleport actions. Sold black circles indicate terminal (failure) states.

Reward
on
success

Reward
on
failure

Policy
identifier

Action in
state A

Action in
state B
Mean return

Mean
reward

State
Action
P(success)

II
Indirect
Indirect
(1, -22)
ID
Indirect
Direct
(0.9, -19.9)
IT
Indirect
Teleport
(0.85, -12)
DI
Direct
Indirect
(0.9, -14.5)
DD
Direct
Direct
(0.81, -12.61)
DT
Direct
Teleport
(0.765, -5.5)
TI
Teleport
Indirect
(0.85, -8.5)
TD
Teleport
Direct
(0.765, -6.715)
TT
Teleport
Teleport
(0.7225, 0)
Table 2: The mean episodic return vector for each of the
nine deterministic policies available for the Space Traders
MOMDP.

Indirect
1.0
(0,-12)
n/a
(0,-12)
Direct
0.9
(0, -6)
(0, -1)
(0, -5.5)
Teleport
0.85
(0,0)
(0,0)
(0, 0)

A

Indirect
1.0
(1, -10)
n/a
(1, -10)
Direct
0.9
(1, -8)
(0, -7)
(0.9, -7.9)
Teleport
0.85
(1, 0)
(0, 0)
(0.85, 0)
Table 1: The probability of success and reward values for
each state-action pair in the Space Traders MOMDP.

B

There are three possible pathways between the two planets.
The direct path (actions shown by solid black lines in Figure 1)
is fairly short, but there is a risk of the agent being waylaid by
space pirates and failing to complete the task. The indirect path
(grey lines) avoids the pirates and so always leads to successful
completion of the mission, but takes longer. Finally the recently
developed teleportation system (dashed lines) allows instantaneous
transportation, but has a higher risk of failure. The figure also
details the probability of success, and the reward for the mission-
success and time objectives for each action – due to variations in
local conditions such as solar winds and the location of the space
pirates, the time values for the outward and return journeys on a
particular path may vary.
Table 1 summarises the transition probabilities and rewards of
the MOMDP, and also shows the mean immediate reward for each
action from each state, weighted by the probability of success.
As there are three actions from each state there are a total of nine
deterministic policies available to the agent. The mean reward per
episode for each of these policies is shown in Table 2 and illustrated
in Figure 2. The solid points in the figure highlight the policies
which belong to the Pareto front, and the dashed grey line indicates
the convex hull (only those policies lying on the convex hull can be

located via methods using linear scalarisation – this set of policies
is referred to as the Convex Coverage Set [13]).
For the remainder of the paper we will assume that the agent’s
aim is to minimise the time taken to complete the delivery and
return to A, subject to having at least an 88% probability of suc-
cessful completion. That is, the scalarisation function f (®v) = v2
if v1 > 0.88 and −∞otherwise. The optimal policy for this aim is
to follow the direct path to B and then the indirect path back to A
(policy DI).

3
APPLYING MODEL-FREE VALUE-BASED
MORL METHODS TO SPACE TRADERS

In this section we will discuss how some of the value-based MORL
methods previously used in the literature would perform on the
Space Traders MOMDP. All the methods discussed are assumed to
be based on a multiobjective extension of model-free value-based
RL algorithms such as Q-Learning or SARSA – for example see [25,
p. 3668]. For the purposes of this section we will restrict discussion
to single-policy methods in which the scalarisation function f is

2

0

Action in state A
Policy
Q(A, a)
Indirect
ID
(0.9, -19.9)
Direct
DD
(0.81, -12.61)
Teleport
TD
(0.765, -6.715)
Table 3: The Q-values which will be learned for each action
in state A, under the assumption that the Direct action will
be selected in State B.

TT

‐5

DT

TD

Time penalty

TI

‐10

DD

IT

‐15

DI

‐20

ID

II

‐25

0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1

only on the current state of the environment, but also on rewards
received so far by the agent during this episode [5, 11]. That is, if the
scalarisation function is f then at time k the agent will select the ac-
tion a which maximises the value of f (Q(sk,a, Ík
t=1 rt ) + Ík
t=1 rt ).
For the purposes of the following discussion we will assume that
f is the thresholded lexicographic ordering operator (TLO) [4, 6],
and that a thresholding parameter of 0.88 is applied to the first
element of the Q-value vector. The intention here is to maximise
the value of the second objective (i.e. minimise time), subject to
achieving the threshold level for the first objective. If this operator
could be applied directly to the mean returns of each policy from
Table 2, then clearly policy DI would be selected.
However if we consider how the TLO operator selects actions
during the execution of a policy, then a different result will emerge.
Regardless of the path selected at state A, if state B is successfully
reached then a zero reward will have been received by the agent.
Therefore the choice of action at state B is independent of the
previous action. Looking at the mean action values reported in
Table 1, it can be seen that action T will be eliminated as it fails to
meet the threshold for the first objective, and that action D will be
preferred over I as both meet the threshold, and D has a superior
value for the time objective. So it can already be seen that this agent
will not converge to the desired policy DI.
Knowing that action D will be selected at state B, we can calculate
the Q-values for each action at state A, as shown in Table 3. The TLO
action selector will eliminate actions D and T from consideration
as neither meets the threshold of 0.88 for the probability of success.
Action I will be selected giving rise to the overall policy ID. Not
only is this not the desired DI policy, but as is evident from Figure
2 its average outcome is in fact Pareto-dominated by DI.

Probability of mission success

Figure 2: The mean return per episode for the nine possible
deterministic policies for the Space Traders MOMDP. Each
policy’s return is labelled with a bigram specifying its ac-
tions. I, D, T refer to the indirect, direct and teleport actions
so, for example, policy DI selects the direct action in state
A and the indirect action in state B. Solid markers indicate
policies which are members of the Pareto-front, and hol-
low markers indicate dominated policies. The dashed grey
lines illustrate the convex hull formed by mixture combina-
tions of the policies which make up the Convex Coverage
Set (CCS). The dashed red vertical line indicates the thresh-
old value of 0.88 for the probability of mission success, and
the red square marker is the DI policy which is optimal for
that setting of the threshold.

used to filter the multiple Pareto-optimal policies which may be
available so as to obtain a single policy which is optimal with
regards to f . Multiple-policy MORL methods will be discussed in
Section 5.
All methods learn vector-valued estimated Q-values, but differ
in terms of the scalarisation or ordering method used to perform
action-selection, and the characteristics on which the Q-value and
policy are conditioned.

3.1
Linear scalarisation

A simple approach to MORL is to apply a linear weighted scalari-
sation to the elements of the Q-value vector prior to selecting the
greedy action. As mentioned earlier, this converts the MOMDP into
an equivalent MDP, and so the Q-values and action-selection need
only be conditioned on the current state of the MDP. However it is
well-known that methods using linear scalarisation are unable to
identify solutions which do not lie on the convex hull of the Pareto
front [22]. Clearly from Figure 2 this is the case for policy DI, and
so linear methods will not be able to converge to this policy. This
result is not surprising and we mention it here simple for the sake
of completeness.

4
THE INTERACTION OF LOCAL
DECISION-MAKING AND STOCHASTIC
STATE TRANSITIONS

The failure of the non-linear value-based MORL algorithms on
the Space Traders MOMDP can be explained by the analysis of
stochastic-transition MOMDPs previously carried out by Bryce
et al. [2] in the context of probabilistic planning. This analysis has
been largely overlooked by MORL researchers so far, and so one of
the contributions of this paper is to bring this work to the attention
of the MORL research community.
Figure 3 illustrates a simple MDP reproduced from Bryce et al.
[2], with a stochastic branch occurring on the transition from the
initial state. The table in the lower half of this figure specifies the
mean return for the four possible deterministic policies. Keeping
in mind that this MOMDP is phrased in terms of minising cost

3.2
Non-linear scalarisation

A variety of non-linear scalarisation methods have been explored in
the MORL literature [4, 23, 24]. The non-linear nature of the scalari-
sation function means that the assumption of additivity underlying
the Bellman equation no longer applies. In order to deal with this,
both the choice of action and the Q-values must be conditioned not

3

Pr(G|S1) = 1.0
E[Cost(S1)] = 50
Pr(G|S2) = 0.5
E[Cost(S2)] = 10

This requirement is fundamentally incompatible with the lo-
calised decision-making at the heart of model-free value-based RL
methods like Q-learning, where it is assumed that the correct choice
of action can be determined purely based on information available
to the agent at the current state. The provision of additional infor-
mation such as the sum of rewards received so far in the episode as
discussed in Section 3.2 is insufficient, as it still only provides infor-
mation about the branch which has been followed in this episode,
rather than all possible branches which might have been executed.
The conclusion to be drawn from both this example and Space
Traders is that value-based model-free MORL methods are inher-
ently limited when applied in the context of SER optimisation of
non-linear utility on MOMDPs with non-deterministic state transi-
tions. These methods may fail to discover the policy which max-
imises the SER (i.e. the mean utility over multiple episodes). To
the best of our knowledge this limitation has not previously been
identified in the MORL literature. It is particularly important as
the combination of SER, stochastic state transitions and non-linear
utility may well arise in important areas of application such as AI
safety [20].

Pr(G|S3) = 0.75
E[Cost(S3)] = 30

S1

Pr(G|S4) = 0.0
E[Cost(S4)] = 0

S3

S2

Pr(G)

S1

Pr(G)

S4

S2

S3

S4

b1
b2

E[Cost]

0.2
0.8
a

E[Cost]

Pr(G)

a,[S1| S3]

a,[S2|S3]

a,[S1| S4]
a,[S2| S4]

bI

E[Cost]

Plans π
E[Cost(π)]
Pr(G|π)
a, [π1|π3]
1+(.2)50+(.8)30 = 35
(.2)1+(.8).75 = .8
a, [π2|π3]
1+(.2)10+(.8)30 = 27
(.2).5+(.8).75 = .7
a, [π1|π4]
1+(.2)50+(.8)0 = 11
(.2)1+(.8)0
= .2
a, [π2|π4]
1+(.2)10+(.8)0 = 3
(.2).5+(.8)0
= .1

5
POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS

In this section we will briefly review and critique various options
which may address the issue identified above.

Figure 3: A sample probabilistic planning MOMDP, repro-
duced from Bryce et al. [2]. Executing action a from bt leads
to two branches with probability 0.2 and 0.8. At each of these
branches a choice between two sub-plans with different pay-
offs exists. The aim for the planner is to identify the correct
sub-plan to execute at each branch, so as to minimise cost
while ensuring successful execution above a fixed probabil-
ity.

5.1
ESR Optimisation

As noted earlier the issue described arises due to the fact that an
agent aiming to find a policy optimal with regards to SER must
take into account the value which will be received on average by
its policy across multiple episodes. Framing the problem in terms
of ESR optimisation would eliminate this issue. However ESR is
clearly inappropriate for the context of the Space Traders MOMDP.
The agent will aim to ensure every episode meets the threshold
for the mission-success objective. This can only be achieved by
following the strictly safe II policy, which produces results which
are far worse for the user’s true utility than the DI policy.

(rather than maximising the inverse of the cost), it can be seen that
unlike Space Traders, there are no Pareto-dominated policies for
this MOMDP.1.
The aim of the agent is to minimise the cost, subject to satisfying
at least a 0.6 probability of success. Within an ESR formulation of the
problem (i.e. ensure the probability of success threshold is achieved
in each episode), the optimal policy is to select sub-plan π1 at branch
b1 and π3 at branchb2 as both of these sub-plans individually satisfy
the probability threshold. However if considered from the SER
perspective, the optimal plan is to execute π2 at branch b1 and π3 at
branch b2 – while π2 itself fails to achieve the probability threshold,
this branch is executed with a low probability and so the mean
outcome of the two sub-plans will achieve the threshold while also
producing a significant cost saving.
As identified by [2], whether the overall policy meets the con-
straints depends on the probability with which each branch is exe-
cuted as well as the mean outcome of each branch. Determining the
correct sub-plan to follow at each branch requires consideration of
the sub-plan options available at each other branch in combination
with the probability of branch execution.

5.2
Non-stationary or non-deterministic
policies

Previous work has demonstrated that for the SER formulation,
or for non-episodic tasks, policies formed from a non-stationary
or non-deterministic mixture of deterministic policies can Pareto-
dominate deterministic policies [17, 21]. For example, a mixture
which randomly selects between policies TI and II with appropri-
ate probabilities at the start of each episode can produce a mean
outcome which exceeds that of policy DI, as shown in Figure 4 –
the mixture policy which selects TI with probability 0.65 and II
with probability 0.35 achieves a mean return of (0.9025, -13.225)
which is superior to the deterministic DI policy with regards to
both objectives.
However the use of policies which vary so widely may not be
appropriate in all contexts – for many problems the more consistent
outcome produced by a deterministic policy may be preferable, and
so methods to find SER-optimal deterministic policies for stochastic
MOMDPs are still required.

1While clearly illustrating the problem, this MOMDP also lacks the narrative drama of
Space Traders!

4

‐7

aware of any prior work which has attempted to do so. However the
model-based MORL approach proposed in Wiering et al. [28] may
provide a suitable basis for implementing a reinforcement learning
equivalent of MOLAO*.

TI

‐9

‐11

IT
0.65TI, 0.35II

Time penalty

‐13

‐15

DI

5.5
Policy-search methods

‐17

An alternative to value-based approaches is to use policy-search
approaches to RL. As these directly maximise the policy as a whole
as defined by a set of policy parameters, they do not have the local
decision-making issue faced by model-free value-based methods.
Multiple researchers have proposed and evaluated policy-search
methods for multiobjective problems [7, 9, 15, 16]. One issue to be
addressed however is that these methods most naturally produce
stochastic policies and as such may have the same problems as
faced by the mixture or non-stationary approaches discussed in
Section 5.2, unless they are modified or constrained so as to ensure
convergence to a deterministic policy.

‐19

ID

‐21

II

‐23

0.85
0.87
0.89
0.91
0.93
0.95
0.97
0.99

Probability of mission success

Figure 4: The mean return per episode for a mixture pol-
icy formed by selecting between the deterministic policies
TI and II with probability 0.65 and 0.35 respectively Pareto-
dominates the mean return of deterministic policy DI.

5.3
Multi-policy value-based MORL

6
CONCLUSION

As well as the single-policy value-based MORL methods examined
in this paper, several authors have proposed multi-policy methods.
These operate by retaining multiple value vectors at each state.
These can correspond to either all Pareto-optimal values obtainable
from that state, or (for purposes of efficiency) be constrained to
store only those values which can help construct the optimal value
function under some assumptions about the nature of the overall
utility function f [13]. Multi-policy algorithms were first proposed
for variants of dynamic programming [26, 27] and more recently
have been extended to MORL [14, 25].
By propagating back the coverage set of values available at each
successor state, these algorithms would correctly identify all poten-
tially optimal policies available at the starting state, and the optimal
policy could then be selected at that point – in the context of Space
Traders this would allow for the desired DI policy to be selected.
However two issues still need to be addressed. One is ensuring
that the agent has a means of determining which action should
be performed in each encountered state to align with the initial
choice of policy. Existing algorithms do not necessarily provide
such a means in the context of stochastic transitions. Second, the
existing multi-policy MORL algorithms do not have an obvious
extension to complex state-spaces where tabular methods are in-
feasible. Conventional function-approximation methods can not
be applied, as the cardinality of the vectors to be stored can vary
between states. Vamplew et al. [19] provides preliminary work ad-
dressing this problem, but further work is still required to make
this approach practical.

We have described a stochastic MOMDP and utility function which,
despite their seeming simplicity, are not amenable to solution by the
widely-used model-free value-based approaches to MORL. While
this issue with MOMDPs with stochastic state transitions has pre-
viously been described in the context of probabilistic planning [2],
this is the first work to identify the implications for MORL. Our
example also demonstrates that under stochastic state-transitions,
it is in fact possible for such MORL methods to converge to a Pareto-
dominated policy.
The combination of SER optimisation, stochastic state transi-
tions and the need for a deterministic policy are likely to arise
in a range of applications (particularly in risk-aware agents), and
so awareness of the limitations of some MORL methods to work
under these characteristics is important in order to avoid the use
of inappropriate methods.

REFERENCES

[1] Leon Barrett and Srini Narayanan. 2008. Learning all optimal policies with
multiple criteria. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine
learning. 41–47.
[2] Daniel Bryce, William Cushing, and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2007. Probabilistic
planning is multi-objective. Arizona State University, Tech. Rep. ASU-CSE-07-006
(2007).
[3] A Castelletti, Stefano Galelli, Marcello Restelli, and Rodolfo Soncini-Sessa. 2010.
Tree-based reinforcement learning for optimal water reservoir operation. Water
Resources Research 46, 9 (2010).
[4] Zoltán Gábor, Zsolt Kalmár, and Csaba Szepesvári. 1998. Multi-criteria reinforce-
ment learning.. In ICML, Vol. 98. 197–205.
[5] Peter Geibel. 2006. Reinforcement learning for MDPs with constraints. In Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning. Springer, 646–653.
[6] Rustam Issabekov and Peter Vamplew. 2012. An empirical comparison of two
common multiobjective reinforcement learning algorithms. In Australasian Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Springer, 626–636.
[7] Simone Parisi, Matteo Pirotta, and Jan Peters. 2017.
Manifold-based multi-
objective policy search with sample reuse. Neurocomputing 263 (2017), 3–14.
[8] Julien Perez, Cécile Germain-Renaud, Balázs Kégl, and Charles Loomis. 2009.
Responsive elastic computing. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference
industry session on Grids meets autonomic computing. 55–64.
[9] Matteo Pirotta, Simone Parisi, and Marcello Restelli. 2015. Multi-objective rein-
forcement learning with continuous Pareto frontier approximation. In Twenty-
Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[10] Roxana Rădulescu, Patrick Mannion, Diederik M Roijers, and Ann Nowé. 2019.
Equilibria in multi-objective games: A utility-based perspective. In Proceedings of
the adaptive and learning agents workshop (ALA-19) at AAMAS.

5.4
Model-based methods

As well as describing the difficulties faced by probabilistic plan-
ning, Bryce et al. [2] also propose a search algorithm known as
Multiobjective Looping AO* (MOLAO*) to solve such tasks. As a
planning method, this assumes an MOMDP with known state tran-
sition probabilities and a finite and tractable number of discrete
states. It may be possible to extend this approach by integrating it
within model-based RL algorithms which can learn to estimate the
transition probabilities and to generalise across states. We are not

5

[11] Diederik M Roijers, Denis Steckelmacher, and Ann Nowé. 2018. Multi-objective
reinforcement learning for the expected utility of the return. In Adaptive Learning
Agents (ALA) workshop at AAMAS, Vol. 18.
[12] Diederik M Roijers, Peter Vamplew, Shimon Whiteson, and Richard Dazeley. 2013.
A survey of multi-objective sequential decision-making. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research 48 (2013), 67–113.
[13] Diederik M Roijers, Shimon Whiteson, and Frans A Oliehoek. 2013. Computing
convex coverage sets for multi-objective coordination graphs. In International
Conference on Algorithmic DecisionTheory. Springer, 309–323.
[14] Manuela Ruiz-Montiel, Lawrence Mandow, and José-Luis Pérez-de-la Cruz. 2017.
A temporal difference method for multi-objective reinforcement learning. Neuro-
computing 263 (2017), 15–25.
[15] Christian Robert Shelton. 2001. Importance sampling for reinforcement learning
with multiple objectives. (2001).
[16] Eiji Uchibe and Kenji Doya. 2007. Constrained reinforcement learning from
intrinsic and extrinsic rewards. In 2007 IEEE 6th International Conference on
Development and Learning. IEEE, 163–168.
[17] Peter Vamplew, Richard Dazeley, Ewan Barker, and Andrei Kelarev. 2009. Con-
structing stochastic mixture policies for episodic multiobjective reinforcement
learning tasks. In Australasian joint conference on artificial intelligence. Springer,
340–349.
[18] Peter Vamplew, Richard Dazeley, Adam Berry, Rustam Issabekov, and Evan
Dekker. 2011. Empirical evaluation methods for multiobjective reinforcement
learning algorithms. Machine learning 84, 1-2 (2011), 51–80.
[19] Peter Vamplew, Richard Dazeley, Cameron Foale, and Tanveer Choudhury. 2018.
Non-functional regression: A new challenge for neural networks. Neurocomputing
314 (2018), 326–335.
[20] Peter Vamplew, Richard Dazeley, Cameron Foale, Sally Firmin, and Jane Mum-
mery. 2018. Human-aligned artificial intelligence is a multiobjective problem.
Ethics and Information Technology 20, 1 (2018), 27–40.
[21] Peter Vamplew, Rustam Issabekov, Richard Dazeley, Cameron Foale, Adam Berry,
Tim Moore, and Douglas Creighton. 2017. Steering approaches to Pareto-optimal
multiobjective reinforcement learning. Neurocomputing 263 (2017), 26–38.
[22] Peter Vamplew, John Yearwood, Richard Dazeley, and Adam Berry. 2008. On
the limitations of scalarisation for multi-objective reinforcement learning of
pareto fronts. In Australasian Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Springer,
372–378.
[23] Kristof Van Moffaert, Madalina M Drugan, and Ann Nowé. 2013. Hypervolume-
based multi-objective reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization. Springer, 352–366.
[24] Kristof Van Moffaert, Madalina M Drugan, and Ann Nowé. 2013. Scalarized
multi-objective reinforcement learning: Novel design techniques. In 2013 IEEE
Symposium on Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning (AD-
PRL). IEEE, 191–199.
[25] Kristof Van Moffaert and Ann Nowé. 2014. Multi-objective reinforcement learning
using sets of pareto dominating policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research
15, 1 (2014), 3483–3512.
[26] DJ White. 1982. Multi-objective infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision
processes. Journal of mathematical analysis and applications 89, 2 (1982), 639–647.
[27] Marco A Wiering and Edwin D De Jong. 2007. Computing optimal stationary
policies for multi-objective markov decision processes. In 2007 IEEE International
Symposium on Approximate Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning.
IEEE, 158–165.
[28] Marco A Wiering, Maikel Withagen, and Mădălina M Drugan. 2014. Model-based
multi-objective reinforcement learning. In 2014 IEEE Symposium on Adaptive
Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning (ADPRL). IEEE, 1–6.
[29] Luisa M Zintgraf, Timon V Kanters, Diederik M Roijers, Frans Oliehoek, and
Philipp Beau. 2015. Quality assessment of MORL algorithms: A utility-based
approach. In Benelearn 2015: Proceedings of the 24th Annual Machine Learning
Conference of Belgium and the Netherlands.

6