AUTOHAS: EFFICIENT HYPERPARAMETER AND AR-
CHITECTURE SEARCH

Xuanyi Dong†‡∗, Mingxing Tan†, Adams Wei Yu†, Daiyi Peng†, Bogdan Gabrys‡, Quoc Le†

† Google Research, Brain Team, ‡ AAI, University of Technology Sydney

ABSTRACT

Efﬁcient hyperparameter or architecture search methods have shown remarkable
results, but each of them is only applicable to searching for either hyperparameters
(HPs) or architectures. In this work, we propose a uniﬁed pipeline, AutoHAS, to
efﬁciently search for both architectures and hyperparameters. AutoHAS learns to
alternately update the shared network weights and a reinforcement learning (RL)
controller, which learns the probability distribution for the architecture candidates
and HP candidates. A temporary weight is introduced to store the updated weight
from the selected HPs (by the controller), and a validation accuracy based on this
temporary weight serves as a reward to update the controller. In experiments, we
show AutoHAS is efﬁcient and generalizable to different search spaces, baselines
and datasets. In particular, AutoHAS can improve the accuracy over popular net-
work architectures, such as ResNet and EfﬁcientNet, on CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet,
and four more other datasets.

arXiv:2006.03656v3 [cs.CV] 7 Apr 2021

1
INTRODUCTION

Deep learning models require intensive efforts in optimizing architectures and hyperparameters.
Standard hyperparameter optimization methods, such as grid search, random search or Bayesian
optimization, are inefﬁcient because they are multi-trial: different conﬁgurations are tried in parallel
to ﬁnd the best conﬁguration. As these methods are expensive, there is a trend towards more efﬁcient,
single-trial methods for speciﬁc hyperparameters. For example, the learning rate can be optimized
with the hypergradient method (Baydin et al., 2018). Similarly, many architecture search methods
started out multi-trial (Zoph & Le, 2017; Baker et al., 2017; Real et al., 2019), but more recent
proposals are single-trial (Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). These efﬁcient methods, however,
sacriﬁce generality: each method only works for one aspect or a subset of the hyperparameters or
architectures.

In this paper, we generalize those efﬁcient, single-trial methods to include both architectures and a
broader range of hyperparameters1. One important beneﬁt of the generalization is that we can have a
general, efﬁcient method for hyperparameter optimization as a special case. Another beneﬁt is that
we can now search for both hyperparameters and architectures in a single model. Practically, this
means that our method is an improvement over neural architecture search (NAS) because each model
can potentially be coupled with its own best hyperparameters, thus achieving comparable or even
better performance than existing NAS with ﬁxed hyperparameters.

To this end, we propose AutoHAS, an efﬁcient hyperparameter and architecture search framework.
It is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst method that can efﬁciently handle architecture space,
hyperparameter space, or the joint search space. AutoHAS utilizes the weight sharing technique
proposed by Pham et al. (2018). The main idea is to train a super model, where each candidate in the
architecture space is its sub-model. Using a super model can avoid training millions of candidates
from scratch (Liu et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2018). AutoHAS extends its scope from architecture
search to both architecture and hyperparameter search. We not only share the weights of super model
with each architecture but also share this super model across hyperparameters. At each search step,

learning rate (LR) weight decay augmentation dropout architecture efﬁcient

Bayesian
√
√
√
√
√
×
RL or Evolution
√
√
√
√
√
×
PBT
√
√
√
√
×
×
Gradient Descent on LR
√
×
×
×
×
√

Hypergradient
×
√
√
×
√
√

NAS (Weight Sharing)
×
×
×
×
√
√

AutoHAS
√
√
√
√
√
√

Table 1: We compare the different aspects of each algorithm. We consider a search algorithm is
efﬁcient if it can complete the search within less than 10× computational costs than training a single
model. Bayesian optimization, traditional RL and evolutionary algorithms are applicable to all kinds
of hyperparameters and architectures, but they are computationally expensive. Population based
training (PBT) methods (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) utilized the incomplete observations
to accelerate the evolutionary algorithms for HPO, but they are still far from efﬁcient. Recent
hypergradient-based HPO methods (Lorraine et al., 2020; Pedregosa, 2016; Shaban et al., 2019;
Baydin et al., 2018) and weight sharing-based NAS methods (Liu et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019; Pham
et al., 2018; Dong & Yang, 2019) are efﬁcient but sacriﬁce the generality. Our AutoHAS takes care
of both efﬁciency and generality.

AutoHAS optimizes the sampled sub-model by a combination of the sampled hyperparameter choices,
and the shared weights of super model serves as a good initialization for all hyperparameters at the
next step of search (see Fig. 1 and Sec. 2). In order to decouple the shared network weights (W in
Fig. 1) and controller optimization, we also propose to create temporary weights for evaluating the
sampled hyperparameters and updating the controller.

A challenge here is that architecture choices (e.g. kernel size) are often categorical values whereas
hyperparameter choices (e.g. learning rate) are often continuous values. To address the mixture of
categorical and continuous search spaces, we ﬁrst discretize the continuous hyperparameters into a
linear combination of multiple categorical basis. The discretization allows us to unify architecture
and hyperparameter choices during search. As explained below, we will use a reinforcement learning
(RL) method to search over these discretized choices in Fig. 1. The probability distribution over
all candidates is naturally learnt by the RL controller, and it is used as the coefﬁcient in the linear
combination to ﬁnd the best architecture and hyperparameters.

AutoHAS shows generalizability, efﬁciency and scaling to large datasets in experiments. It consis-
tently improves the baselines’ accuracy when searching for architectures, hyperparameters, and both
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, Place365, etc. In experiments, AutoHAS shows non-trivial
improvements on eight datasets, such as 0.8% accuracy gain on highly-optimized EfﬁcientNet and
11% accuracy gain on less-optimized models. AutoHAS reduces the search cost by over 10× than
random search and Bayesian search. We also summarize the beneﬁts of our AutoHAS over other
search methods in Table 1.

2
AUTOHAS

AutoHAS can handle the general case of NAS and HPO – able to ﬁnd both architecture α and
hyperparameters h that achieve high performance on the validation set Dval. This objective can be
formulated as a bi-level optimization problem:

min
α,h L(α, ω∗
α,h, Dval) s.t. ω∗
α,h = fh(α, Dtrain),
(1)

where L is the objective function (e.g., cross-entropy loss). Dtrain and Dval denote the training data
and the validation data, respectively. fh represents the algorithm with hyperparameters h to obtain
the optimal weights ω∗
α,h. For example, fh could be using SGD to minimize the training loss, where
h denotes the hyperparameters of SGD. In this case, ω∗
α,h is the ﬁnal optimized weights after the
SGD converged.

Update W using the sampled HP

W

Candidate
Architecture

Loss
Sample

Training

Layer-0

Layer-0

*
W

Layer-1

Layer-1

AutoHAS
Controller

Candidate
Architecture

Validation

Accuracy

Compute W* using W and HP

Sample

Layer-2

Candidate HP
(RMSProp, LR=0.1)

Layer-2

Super
Model

Candidate
Architecture

Update the AutoHAS controller

Figure 1: The overview of AutoHAS. LEFT: Each candidate architecture’s weights are shared with
a super model, where each candidate is a sub model within this super model. RIGHT: During the
search, AutoHAS alternates between optimizing the shared weights of super model W and updating
the controller. It also creates temporary weights W∗by optimizing the sampled candidate architecture
using the sampled candidate hyperparameter (HP). This W∗will be used to compute the validation
accuracy as a reward so as to update the AutoHAS controller to select better candidates. Finally, W∗
is discarded after updating the controller so as not to affect the original W.

2.1
UNIFIED REPRESENTATION OF HYPERPARAMETERS AND ARCHITECTURES

The search space in AutoHAS is a Cartesian product of the architecture and hyperparameter candidates.
To search over this mixed search space, we need a uniﬁed representation of different searchable
components, i.e., architectures, learning rates, optimizer, etc.

Architectures Search Space
We use the simplest case as an example. First of all, let the set of
predeﬁned candidate operations (e.g., 3x3 convolution, pooling, etc.) be O = {O1, O2, ..., On},
where the cardinality of O is n for each layer in the architecture. Suppose an architecture is
constructed by stacking multiple layers, each layer takes a tensor F as input and output π(F), which
serves as the next layer’s input. π ∈O denotes the operation at a layer and might be different at
different layers. Then a candidate architecture α is essentially the sequence for all layers {π}. Further,
a layer can be represented as a linear combination of the operations in O as follows:

π(F) =
Xn

i=1 Cα
i Oi(F) s.t.
Xn

i=1 Cα
i = 1, Cα
i ∈{0, 1},
(2)

where Cα
i (the i-th element of the vector Cα) is the coefﬁcient of operation Oi for a layer.

Hyperparameter Search Space Now we can deﬁne the hyperparameter search space in a similar
way. The major difference is that we have to consider both categorical and continuous cases:

i=1 Ch
i = 1, and Ch
i
∈
[0, 1],
if continuous
{0, 1},
if categorical ,
(3)

h =
Xm

i=1 Ch
i Bi
s.t.
Xm

where B is a predeﬁned set of hyperparameter basis with the cardinality of m and Bi is the i-th
basis in B. Ch
i (the i-th element of the vector Ch) is the coefﬁcient of hyperparameter basis Bi. If
we have a continuous hyperparameter, we have to discretize it into a linear combination of basis
and unify both categorical and continuous. For example, for weight decay, B could be {1e-1, 1e-2,
1e-3}, and therefore, all possible weight decay values can be represented as a linear combination over
B. For categorical hyperparameters, taking the optimizer as an example, B could be {Adam, SGD,
RMSProp}. In this case, a constraint on Ch
i is applied: Ch
i ∈{0, 1} as in Eq. (3).

2.2
EFFICIENT HYPERPARAMETER AND ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

Given the discretizing strategy in Sec. 2.1, each candidate in the search space can be represented by
the value of C = {Cα for all layers, Ch for all hyperparameters}, which represents the coefﬁcients
for all architecture and hyperparameter choices. As a result, AutoHAS converts the searching problem
to obtaining the coefﬁcients C. Below we will introduce how to calculate these coefﬁcients.

independent multinomial variables P = {P α for all layers, P h for all hyperparameters} , which
draws the probability distribution of the discretized space. AutoHAS also leverages a super model
to share weights W among all candidate architectures, where each candidate is a sub-model in this
super model. Furthermore, AutoHAS extends the scope of weight sharing from architecture to
hyperparameters, where W also serves as the initialization for the algorithm fh.

AutoHAS alternates between learning the shared weights W and learning the controller using
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992). Speciﬁcally, at each iteration, the controller samples a candidate
— an architecture α and basis hyperparameter h ∈B. We estimate its quality Q(α, h) by utilizing
the temporary weights W∗
α, which are generated by applying the gradients from training loss to the
original weights Wα of the architecture α with hyperparameters h. This estimated quality is used as
a reward to update the controller’s parameters P via REINFORCE. Then, we optimize the shared
weights W by minimizing the training loss calculated by the sampled architecture. More details can
be found in Alg. 1 in Appendix.

Discussion
In practice, the training of shared weights in efﬁcient NAS often suffers from the
instability problem (Liu et al., 2019; Dong & Yang, 2019; Zela et al., 2020), and that for HAS can be
more pronounced. To make AutoHAS more stable, we will sample tens of candidate pairs of α and
h, and average the gradients from all these pairs for W as well as that for P to update W and P. In
this way, the high variance of the gradients from different samples can be signiﬁcantly reduced. In
experiments, this strategy is achieved via training on the distribution system, such that each core can
individually sample a different pair.

During the aforementioned strategy, the temporary weights allows us to effectively decouple the
shared network weights and controller optimization. If we directly override W without using
temporary weights W∗, it will pollute the shared weights update. This is because that different
sampled pairs will use different weights for overriding and quarrel with each other.

2.3
DERIVING HYPERPARAMETERS AND ARCHITECTURE

After AutoHAS learns P = {P α, P h}, we can derive the coefﬁcient C as follows:

Cα = one hot(arg maxi P α)
Ch =
P h
if continuous
one hot(arg maxi P h)
if categorical ,
(4)

Together with Eq. (2) and Eq. (3), we can derive the ﬁnal architecture α and hyperparameters h.
Intuitively speaking, the selected operation in the ﬁnal architecture has the highest probability over
other candidates, and so does the categorical hyperparameter. For the continuous hyperparameter, the
ﬁnal one is the weighted sum of the learnt probability P h with its basis B.

To evaluate whether the AutoHAS-discovered α and h is good or not, we will use h to re-train α on
the whole training set and report its performance on the test sets.

3
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS

AutoHAS is a uniﬁed, efﬁcient, and general framework for joint architecture and hyperparameter
search. We show its applicability and efﬁciency when integrated with RL-based and differentiable-
based searching algorithm in Table 2. It is also easy to switch from RL to a Bayesian-based searching
algorithm, which will be investigated in the future.

In Table 2, we use the popular MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al., 2018) as our baseline model. We compare
its performance with AutoHAS-discovered architecture and hyperparameters. On the same par of
computational resources as training MobileNet-V2, AutoHAS ﬁnds a better model. In addition,
AutoHAS (REINFORCE) is more efﬁcient than AutoHAS (Differentiable). More empirical analysis
can be found in Appendix.

#Params (MB)
#FLOPs (M)
ImageNet
Accuracy (%)
Search Cost
Memory (GB)
Time (TPU Hour)

Baseline model
1.5
35.9
50.96
1.0 (Training Cost)
44.8 (Training Cost)

AutoHAS (Differentiable)
1.5
36.1
52.17
6.1
92.8
AutoHAS (REINFORCE)
1.5
36.3
53.01
1.8
54.4

Acknowledgements
We want to thank Gabriel Bender, Hanxiao Liu, Hieu Pham, Ruoming Pang,
Barret Zoph and Yanqi Zhou for their help and feedback.

REFERENCES

Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network architec-
tures using reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2017.

Atılım G¨unes¸ Baydin, Robert Cornish, David Mart´ınez Rubio, Mark Schmidt, and Frank Wood.
Online learning rate adaptation with hypergradient descent. In ICLR, 2018.

Gabriel Bender, Hanxiao Liu, Bo Chen, Grace Chu, Shuyang Cheng, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and
Quoc V Le. Can weight sharing outperform random architecture search? an investigation with
tunas. In CVPR, 2020.

James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. JMLR, 2012.

Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. ProxylessNAS: Direct neural architecture search on target task
and hardware. In ICLR, 2019.

Han Cai, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Once for all: Train one network and specialize it for efﬁcient
deployment. In ICLR, 2020.

Xiaoliang Dai, Alvin Wan, Peizhao Zhang, Bichen Wu, Zijian He, Zhen Wei, Kan Chen, Yuandong
Tian, Matthew Yu, Peter Vajda, et al. FBNetV3: Joint architecture-recipe search using neural
acquisition function. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02049, 2020.

Erik A Daxberger, Anastasia Makarova, Matteo Turchetta, and Andreas Krause. Mixed-variable
bayesian optimization. In IJCAI, 2020.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In CVPR, 2009.

Tobias Domhan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, and Frank Hutter. Speeding up automatic hyperparameter
optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves. In IJCAI, 2015.

Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. Searching for a robust neural architecture in four gpu hours. In CVPR,
2019.

Daniel Golovin, Benjamin Solnik, Subhodeep Moitra, Greg Kochanski, John Karro, and D Sculley.
Google vizier: A service for black-box optimization. In SIGKDD, 2017.

Frank Hutter. Automated conﬁguration of algorithms for solving hard computational problems. PhD
thesis, University of British Columbia, 2009.

Frank Hutter, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization
for general algorithm conﬁguration. In International Conference on Learning and Intelligent
Optimization, 2011.

Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated Machine Learning. Springer, 2019.

Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based training
of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.

Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efﬁcient global optimization of expensive
black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 1998.

Aaron Klein and Frank Hutter. Tabular benchmarks for joint architecture and hyperparameter
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04970, 2019.

Ang Li, Ola Spyra, Sagi Perel, Valentin Dalibard, Max Jaderberg, Chenjie Gu, David Budden, Tim
Harley, and Pramod Gupta. A generalized framework for population based training. In SIGKDD,
2019.

Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. In
UAI, 2020.

Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyperband:
A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. JMLR, 2017.

Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In ICLR,
2019.

Jonathan Lorraine, Paul Vicol, and David Duvenaud. Optimizing millions of hyperparameters by
implicit differentiation. In AISTATS, 2020.

Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan Adams. Gradient-based hyperparameter optimization
through reversible learning. In ICML, 2015.

Fabian Pedregosa. Hyperparameter optimization with approximate gradient. In ICML, 2016.

Hieu Pham, Melody Y Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V Le, and Jeff Dean. Efﬁcient neural architecture
search via parameter sharing. In ICML, 2018.

Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for image
classiﬁer architecture search. In AAAI, 2019.

Binxin Ru, Ahsan Alvi, Vu Nguyen, Michael A Osborne, and Stephen Roberts. Bayesian optimisation
over multiple continuous and categorical inputs. In ICML, 2020.

Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
bileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In CVPR, 2018.

Amirreza Shaban, Ching-An Cheng, Nathan Hatch, and Byron Boots. Truncated back-propagation
for bilevel optimization. In AISTATS, 2019.

Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2015.

Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram,
Mostofa Patwary, Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable bayesian optimization using deep neural
networks. In ICML, 2015.

Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. EfﬁcientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural
networks. In ICML, 2019.

Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and
Quoc V Le. MNasNet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In CVPR, 2019.

Alvin Wan, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Zijian He, Yuandong Tian, Saining Xie, Bichen Wu,
Matthew Yu, Tao Xu, Kan Chen, et al. FBNetV2: Differentiable neural architecture search for
spatial and channel dimensions. In CVPR, 2020.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine Learning, 1992.

Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang, Fei Sun, Yiming Wu, Yuandong Tian,
Peter Vajda, Yangqing Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. FBNet: Hardware-aware efﬁcient convnet design via
differentiable neural architecture search. In CVPR, 2019.

Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. SNAS: stochastic neural architecture search.
In ICLR, 2019.

Arber Zela, Thomas Elsken, Tonmoy Saikia, Yassine Marrakchi, Thomas Brox, and Frank Hutter.
Understanding and robustifying differentiable architecture search. In ICLR, 2020.

Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
risk minimization. In ICLR, 2018.

Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10
million image database for scene recognition. TPAMI, 2017.

Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2017.

Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Learning transferable architectures
for scalable image recognition. In CVPR, 2018.

A
EXPLAIN AUTOHAS ALGORITHM

AutoHAS alternates between optimizing the super model (parameterized by the shared weights
W) and the AutoHAS controller (parameterized by the multinomial variables P). Once AutoHAS
completes the training of controller, we will follow Sec. 2.3 to derive the ﬁnal architecture and
hyperparameters.

To optimize the AutoHAS controller, it samples a candidate — an architecture α and basis hyperpa-
rameter h ∈B. Taking the architecture α’s weights Wα as the initialization, we apply hyperparameter
h to update Wα by one or multiple gradient descent steps to obtain the temporary weights W∗
α. We
use the temporary weights W∗
α to calculate the quality Q(α, h) to update the AutoHAS controller.
After that, the temporary weights W∗
α will be discarded and not affect the original weights Wα. When
we target better accuracy for HAS, the quality Q(α, h) is the accuracy of a batch of validation data.
When we target on FLOP-constrained problem, the quality Q(α, h) becomes a hybrid one combing
both accuracy and FLOPs, such as the hard exponential reward function in MNasNet (Tan et al., 2019)
or absolute reward function in TuNAS (Bender et al., 2020). In Alg. 1, we show an example of using
the simplest RL algorithm – REINFORCE – to optimize the controller. AutoHAS is general and can
be integrated with a differentiable searching algorithm to optimize AutoHAS controller2. Bayesian
optimization can also be easily integrated into AutoHAS, where the acquisition function serves to
sample candidates and the quality used to improve the surrogate model in Bayesian optimization. We
would investigate these extensions in future.

To optimize the super model’s weights, AutoHAS controller samples a candidate — an architecture α
and basis hyperparameter h ∈B. Then, AutoHAS use the optimization algorithm represented by h to
update the weights Wα in the super model corresponding to the architecture α.

In practice, we average the gradients for multiple samples to update the super model or the controller.
This can stabilize the training of AutoHAS and can be naturally implemented by using parallel
computation of multiple GPU/TPU devices.

Note that, in the main paper, we sometimes omit α in W∗
α and Wα for simplicity.

Scope of AutoHAS: AutoHAS can search for most kinds of hyperparameters, including learning
rate scheduler, momentum coefﬁcient, weight decay, dropout ratio, data augmentation policy, etc.
However, it can not be used to search for weight initialization.

Comparison with weight-sharing NAS: AutoHAS utilized the temporary weights W∗instead of
the raw weights W in (Pham et al., 2018; Li & Talwalkar, 2020; Dong & Yang, 2019; Zela et al.,
2020) to compute the validation accuracy (loss for differentiable NAS). This accuracy over W∗
evaluates “the performance of both architecture and hyperparameters” instead of “the performance
of only architecture” in (Pham et al., 2018; Li & Talwalkar, 2020; Dong & Yang, 2019; Zela et al.,
2020). In addition, AutoHAS generalizes both ENAS (Pham et al., 2018) and GDAS (Dong & Yang,
2019). ENAS can be viewed as a special case of AutoHAS that uses W replacing W∗and searches
for architecture only. GDAS can be viewed as a special case of AutoHAS (Differentiable Variant)
that uses W replacing W∗and searches for architecture only.

How to create the basis for hyperparameters? For the categorical hyperparameter, its basis is the
set of candidate categorical values. For the continuous hyperparameter, we typically uniform-choose
10 scalars around its default value, where the default value is the commonly used value in previous
literature.

Algorithm 1 The AutoHAS Algorithm.
W indicates the super model’s weights. Wα indicates the weights of α, which is a subset of W.

Input: Split the available data into two disjoint sets: Dtrain and Dval

1: Randomly initialize the super model’s weights W and the controller’s parameters P
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample (α, h ∈B) from the controller
4:
Compute the temporary weights W∗
α by applying h on Wα
5:
Calculate the quality Q(α, h) as the reward to update controller by REINFORCE
6:
[Optionally] Re-sample (α, h ∈B) from the controller
7:
Optimize Wα by one step of gradient descent based on fh and Dtrain
8: end while
9: Derive the ﬁnal architecture α and hyperparameters h by P (Sec. 2.3)

B
RELATED WORKS

We summarize the advantages of AutoHAS over other neural architecture search and hyperparameter
search (aka., hyperparameter optimization) methods in Table 1.

Neural Architecture Search. Since the seminal works (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2017) show
promising improvements over manually designed architectures, more efforts have been devoted to
NAS. The accuracy of NAS models has been improved by carefully designed search space (Zoph et al.,
2018), better search method (Real et al., 2019), or compound scaling (Tan & Le, 2019). The model
size and latency have been reduced by Pareto optimization (Tan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Cai
et al., 2019; 2020) and enlarged search space of neural size (Cai et al., 2020). The efﬁciency of NAS
algorithms has been improved by weight sharing (Pham et al., 2018), differentiable optimization (Liu
et al., 2019), or stochastic sampling (Dong & Yang, 2019; Xie et al., 2019). As these NAS methods
use ﬁxed hyperparameters during search, we have empirically observed that they often lead to sub-
optimal results, because different architectures tend to favor their own hyperparameters. In addition,
even if the manual optimization of architecture design is avoided by NAS, they still need to tune the
hyperparameters after a good architecture is discovered.

Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO). Black-box and multi-ﬁdelity HPO methods have a long
standing history (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012; Hutter, 2009; Hutter et al., 2011; 2019; Kohavi & John,
1995). Black-box methods, e.g., grid search and random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), regard
the evaluation function as a black-box. They sample some hyperparameters and evaluate them one
by one to ﬁnd the best. Bayesian methods can make the sampling procedure in random search more
efﬁcient (Jones et al., 1998; Shahriari et al., 2015; Snoek et al., 2015). They employ a surrogate model
and an acquisition function to decide which candidate to evaluate next. Multi-ﬁdelity optimization
methods accelerate the above methods by evaluating on a proxy task, e.g., using less training epochs
or a subset of data (Domhan et al., 2015; Jaderberg et al., 2017; Kohavi & John, 1995; Li et al., 2017).
These HPO methods are computationally expensive to search for deep learning models.

Method
Search Space
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
Stanford Cars
Oxford Flower
SUN-397

MobileNetV2 (baseline)
94.1
76.3
83.8
74.0
46.3

AutoHAS
Weight Decay
95.0
77.8
89.0
84.4
49.1
AutoHAS
MixUp
94.1
77.0
85.2
79.6
47.4
AutoHAS
Arch
94.5
76.8
84.1
76.4
46.3

AutoHAS
MixUp + Arch
94.4
77.4
84.8
78.2
47.3

AutoHAS
Weight Decay + MixUp
95.0 (+0.9)
78.4 (+2.1)
89.9 (+6.1)
84.4 (+10.4)
50.5 (+4.2)

Table 3: Classiﬁcation top-1 accuracy (%) of AutoHAS for different search space on ﬁve datasets.
Weight decay and MixUp Zhang et al. (2018) are for hyperparameters, and Arch is for architectures.
Each experiment is repeated three times and the average accuracy is reported (standard deviation is
about 0.2%).

Our method is also related to population based training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019).
They are asynchronous optimization algorithms that jointly optimize a population of models and their
hyperparameters. Our AutoHAS is more efﬁcient and general than PBT methods due to two factors.
First, PBT needs to maintain a large number of model population in parallel, whereas AutoHAS only
needs to handle a single model and its temporary weights at each iteration. Second, PBT can not be
directly used for architecture search.

Recent HPO methods also pay attention to the mixture search space (Ru et al., 2020; Daxberger et al.,
2020). However, due to their multi-trial nature, it is impractical to apply them for large-scale models
and datasets.

Hyperparameter and Architecture Search. Few approaches have been developed for the joint
searching of hyperparameter and architecture (Klein & Hutter, 2019; Zela et al., 2018). However, they
focus on small datasets and small search spaces. These methods are more computationally expensive
than AutoHAS. Concurrent to our AutoHAS, FBNet-V3 (Dai et al., 2020) learns an acquisition
function to predict the performance for the pair of hyperparameter and architecture. They require
to evaluate thousands of pairs to optimize this function and thus costs much more computational
resources than ours.

C
EXPERIMENTS

We evaluate AutoHAS on eight datasets, including two large-scale datasets, ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009) and Places365 (Zhou et al., 2017). We will brieﬂy introduce the experimental settings in
Sec. C.1. We demonstrate the generalizability of AutoHAS in Sec. C.2 and show its efﬁciency in
Sec. C.3. Furthermore, we verify AutoHAS’s scalability in Sec. C.4. Lastly, we ablatively study
AutoHAS in Sec. C.5.

C.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

Searching settings. We call the hyperparameters that control the behavior of AutoHAS as meta
hyperparameters – the optimizer and learning rate for RL controller, the momentum ratio for RL
baseline, and the warm-up ratio. Warm-upping the REINFORCE algorithm indicates that we do not
update the parameters of the controller at the beginning. In addition, when the search space includes
architecture choices, we also uses the warm-up technique described in Bender et al. (2020). For
these meta hyperparameters, we use Adam, momentum as 0.95, warm-up ratio as 0.3. The meta
learning rate is selected from {0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1} according to the validation performance. When
the architecture choices are in the search space, we will use the absolute reward function (Bender
et al., 2020) to constrain the FLOPs of the searched model to be the same as the baseline model.
For experiments on ImageNet and Places365, we use the batch size of 4096, search for 100 epochs,
and use 4×4 Cloud TPU V3 chips. For experiments on other datasets, we use the batch size of 512,
search for 15K steps, and use Cloud TPUv3-8 chips.

we keep it the same as the baseline models. For each experiment, we run three times and report the
mean of the accuracy.

C.2
GENERALIZABILITY OF AUTOHAS

To evaluate the generalization ability of AutoHAS, we have evaluated AutoHAS in different hy-
perparameter and architecture spaces for ﬁve datasets. For simplicity, we choose the standard
MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al., 2018) as our baseline model3. Table 3 shows the results. We observe
that AutoHAS achieves up to 10% accuracy gain on the Flower dataset, suggesting that AutoHAS
could be more useful for less optimized or new model/dataset scenarios.

C.3
EFFICIENCY OF AUTOHAS

We evaluate the efﬁciency of AutoHAS on ImageNet in Fig. 2a. We still choose MobileNetV2 (Sandler
et al., 2018) as the baseline model. We search for the mixup ratio from [0, 0.2] and drop-path ratio
from [0, 0.5] for each MBConv layer. We use the training schedule in (Bender et al., 2020). Results
compared with four representative HPO methods are shown in Fig. 2a. Multi-trial search methods –
Random Search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) or Bayesian optimization (Golovin et al., 2017) – must
train and evaluate many candidates from scratch, and thus are inefﬁcient. Even using 10× more time,
they still cannot match the accuracy of AutoHAS. This is because AutoHAS uses weight sharing and
only requires negligible cost for every new sampled candidate. AutoHAS can traverse hundreds of
more samples, within the same amount of time, than the traditional Random Search and Bayesian
optimization.

Comparing AutoHAS to differentiable HPO methods, HGD (Baydin et al., 2018) can only search for
the learning rate and the searched learning rate is much worse than the baseline. IFT (Lorraine et al.,
2020) is an efﬁcient gradient-based HPO method. With the same search space, AutoHAS gets higher
accuracy than IFT.

Model
Method
#Params (M)
#FLOPs (M)
Top-1 Accuracy (%)

ResNet-50
Human
25.6
4110
77.20
AutoHAS
25.6
4110
77.83 (+0.63)

EfﬁcientNet-B0
NAS
5.3
398
77.15
AutoHAS
5.2
418
77.92 (+0.77)

Table 4: AutoHAS improves popular models on the ImageNet dataset.

As another proof of AutoHAS’s efﬁciency, we follow MNasNet (Tan et al., 2019) and Proxyless-
NAS Cai et al. (2019) to design an architecture search space (i.e., kernel size {3x3, 5x5} and
expansion ratio {3, 6} on top of MobileNetV2), and a joint search space with additional hyperparam-
eter search options (i.e., mixup and dropout ratio). We then compare AutoHAS performance on these
two search spaces. With architecture-only search, AutoHAS achieves comparable results (e.g., 73.9%
accuracy @ 300M ﬂops) as MNasNet/ProxylessNAS. With the joint search, AutoHAS can further
improve accuracy by 0.2% with negligible additional cost. Notably, AutoHAS has the the same level
of computational costs as efﬁcient NAS methods, but NAS methods are infeasible to optimize the
hyperparameters.

C.4
AUTOHAS CAN SCALE TO LARGE DATASETS

To investigate the effect of AutoHAS over the large-scale datasets, we apply AutoHAS to two popular
ImageNet models. Firstly, we choose ResNet-50. The baseline strategy is to train it by 200 epochs,
start the learning rate at 1.6 and decay it by 0.1 for every 1

3 of the whole training procedure, use EMA
with the decay rate of 0.9999, and apply SGD with the momentum of 0.9. This can provide higher
accuracy than the original paper. For reference, the reported top-1 accuracy is 76.15% for ResNet-50
in TorchVision, whereas our baseline is 77.2% accuracy. Since previous methods usually do not tune
the architecture of ResNet-50, we only use AutoHAS to search for its hyperparameters including the
learning rate and the mixup ratio. From Table 4, AutoHAS improves this ResNet baseline by 0.63%.

74

58

AutoHAS

ImageNet Accuracy (%)

B0 + AutoHAS

IFT

73

Places365 Accuracy (%)

Bayesian Optimization

57

DPN-92 (32x3d)
B0

ResNeXt-101
CRU-Net-116

72

56

VGG-16

71

55

Random Search

ResNet-152

70

54

HGD

GoogleLeNet

69

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Search Time Cost (TPU Hours)

AlexNet

53

100
200
300
400
500
600
Parameters (MB)

(a) Comparison between AutoHAS and previous
HPO methods on ImageNet. AutoHAS achieves
higher accuracy than HGD and IFT, and uses much
less search time cost than others.

(b) AutoHAS improves accuracy by 1% for
EfﬁcientNet-B0 on Places365.

Figure 2: LEFT: Comparison between AutoHAS and other HPO methods. RIGHT: Comparison
between AutoHAS and other popular models.

#Params (MB)
#FLOPs (M)
Accuracy (%)
Search Cost
Memory (GB)
Time (TPU Hour)

Baseline model
1.5
35.9
50.96
1.0
44.8

AutoHAS (Differentiable Variant)
1.5
36.1
52.17
6.1
92.8
AutoHAS (REINFORCE)
1.5
36.3
53.01
1.8
54.4

Table 5: AutoHAS Differentiable Search vs. AutoHAS REINFORCE Search – Both are applied
to the same baseline model with the same hyperparameter and architecture search space. Baseline
model has no search cost, but we list its standalone training cost as a reference. Compared to the
differentiable search, AutoHAS achieves slightly better accuracy with much less search memory cost.

Secondly, we choose a NAS-searched model, EfﬁcientNet-B0 (Tan & Le, 2019). The baseline strategy
is to train it by 600 epochs and use the same learning rate schedule as in the original paper. As
EfﬁcientNet-B0 already tunes the kernel size and expansion ratio, we choose a different architecture
space. Speciﬁcally, in each MBConv layer, we search for the number of groups for all the 1-by-1
convolution layer, the number of depth-wise convolution layer, whether to use a residual branch or
not. In terms of the hyperparameter space, we search for the per-layer drop-connect ratio, mixup
ratio, and the learning rate. We use AutoHAS to ﬁrst search for the architecture and then for the
hyperparameters. From Table 4, we improves the strong EfﬁcientNet-B0 baseline by 0.77% ImageNet
top-1 accuracy.

AutoHAS improves SoTA Places365 models. Beside ImageNet, we have also evaluated AutoHAS
on another popular dataset: Places365. Similarly, we apply AutoHAS to EfﬁcientNet-B0 to search
for better architectures and hyperparameters on this dataset. Fig. 2b shows the results: Although
EfﬁcientNet-B0 is a strong baseline with signiﬁcantly better parameter-accuracy trade-offs than other
models, AutoHAS can still further improve its accuracy 1% and obtain a new state-of-the-art accuracy
on Places365. Note that B0 and B0 + AutoHAS only uses single crop evaluation, while other
models use 10 crops.

C.5
ABLATION STUDIES AND VISUALIZATION

0.09

first layer in block0
last layer in block0

0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
first layer in block1
last layer in block1

drop-connect ratio

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

0.20
first layer in block3
last layer in block3

first layer in block2
last layer in block2

0.16

drop-connect ratio

0.18

0.14

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.10

0.10

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

Figure 3: We visualize the AutoHAS-discovered drop-connect ratio for some layers in EfﬁcientNet-
B0. The x-axis and y-axis indicate the search step and drop-connect ratio, respectively.

and REINFORCE search in Table 5. Not surprisingly, differentiable search requires much higher
memory cost (6.1x more than baseline) as it needs to maintain the feature or gradient tensors for
all the super model, whereas our REINFORMCE-based AutoHAS is much more memory efﬁcient:
reducing the memory cost by 70% than the differentiable approach. Empirically, we observe they
achieve similar accuracy gains in this case, but AutoHAS enables us to search for much larger models
such as EfﬁcientNet-B0 and ResNet-50 as shown in Table 4.

Visualization. We show the intermediate search results of drop-connect ratios in Fig. 3. Human
experts have prior knowledge that drop-connect is crucial to the performance. However, it is
prohibitive to manually tune a proper ratio for each of those 10+ drop-connect layers in EfﬁcientNet-
B0. Our AutoHAS is suitable for such a scenario, it can discover suitable ratios for many drop-connect
layers in a single trial.

D
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we proposed an automated and uniﬁed framework AutoHAS, which can efﬁciently
search for hyperparameters and architectures. AutoHAS provides a novel perspective of AutoML
algorithms by generalizing the weight sharing technique from architectures to hyperparameters.
AutoHAS integrates several techniques to be memory friendly, efﬁcient, generalized, and scalable.
Experimentally, AutoHAS improves the baseline models on eight datasets over different kinds of
search spaces. For the highly-optimized ResNet/EfﬁcientNet, it improves ImageNet top-1 accuracy
by 0.8%; for other less-optimized scenarios (e.g., Oxford Flower), it improves the accuracy by 11.4%.

In the future, we would evaluate AutoHAS on NAS or HAS benchmarks. In addition, we would
comprehensively investigate AutoHAS’s performance by integrating different searching algorithms
in AutoHAS.