A
Public
Website
for
the
Automated
Assessment and Validation of SARS-CoV-2
Diagnostic PCR Assays

Po-E Li1, Adán Myers y Gutiérrez1, Karen Davenport, Mark Flynn, Bin Hu,
Chien-Chi Lo, Elais Player Jackson, Migun Shakya, Yan Xu, Jason Gans*,
and Patrick S. G. Chain*

Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico

1Contributed equally to this work.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

Abstract
Summary: Polymerase chain reaction-based assays are the current gold standard for detecting and
diagnosing SARS-CoV-2. However, as SARS-CoV-2 mutates, we need to constantly assess whether
existing PCR-based assays will continue to detect all known viral strains. To enable the continuous
monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 assays, we have developed a web-based assay validation algorithm that
checks existing PCR-based assays against the ever-expanding genome databases for SARS-CoV-2
using both thermodynamic and edit-distance metrics. The assay screening results are displayed as a
heatmap, showing the number of mismatches between each detection and each SARS-CoV-2 genome
sequence. Using a mismatch threshold to define detection failure, assay performance is summarized
with the true positive rate (recall) to simplify assay comparisons.
Availability:
Contact: Jason Gans and Patrick Chain

SARS. For sequences found in both databases, only the GenBank version
is retained. True positives are defined as any assay-target pairwise
alignment that contains in 0, 1, or 2 mismatches (in the oligonucleotide
with the most mismatches). False negatives are defined as an assay/target
combination that has either (a) one or more oligo/target pairwise
alignments with 3 or more mismatches, or (b) one or more predicted
oligo/target melting temperatures less than 40°C. Since all of the included
assays are intended to detect SARS-CoV-2 and false positives are not
predicted, assay performance is quantified by the recall (defined as the
number of true positives divided by the sum of true positives and false
negatives).

1
Introduction

Many aspects of the control, management and treatment responses to the
global COVID-19 pandemic require accurate detection of its causative
agent, SARS-CoV-2. To address this challenge, research groups around
the world have developed Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)-based
assays to detect SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA (Supplementary Tables S1).

The impact of SARS-CoV-2 genetic drift on the ability of PCR-based
assays to successfully detect target sequences is a concern. To address this
concern, we have developed a web-based application that monitors
existing SARS-CoV-2 PCR-based assays that are in use around the world
and provides a visual summary of assay performance. Both the acquisition
of new genomes and the assay validation process is automated, so that
assays are checked and displayed daily to give near real-time results.

2
Implementation

The core of the validation algorithm is the ThermonucleotideBLAST
(Gans and Wolinsky, 2008) in silico PCR screening tool. Publicly
available assays are used as queries in ThermonucleotideBLAST and
searched against a target database of SARS-CoV-2 genomes from the
Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) (Shu and
McCauley, 2017) and Genbank (Clark et al., 2016).

Sequences are downloaded daily from these databases and filtered to
exclude any that are less than 29 kilobases or are pangolin-SARS and bat-

interactive view of molecular assay performance that is updated regularly
with recently deposited genomes (>31K as of May 22, 2020).

The heatmap-phylogeny view reveals patterns in predicted assay
performance, including mismatches for the Charité RdRP assays (Vogels
et al., 2020, Corman, et al., 2020) that were originally developed for
testing SARS and/or SARS-related bat coronaviruses (Fig. 1C). A
different pattern, previously noted by Vogels et al. (Vogels et al., 2020),
is seen within a subset of phylogenetically related strains due to a
mismatch in the USA CDC N3 assay (CDC, 2020). Finally, a set of
regularly updated assay designs are also included. Each of these assays is
selected to individually maximize the predicted recall while maintaining
multiplex compatibility with the other assays in the set. As genomics
continues to be used for understanding pathogen outbreaks, resources such
as the one provided by this website may help in the early identification of
potential assay concerns, and provide guidance on alternate assay designs
early on, to mitigate current assays that may be eroding.

Acknowledgments

The authors declare no conflict of interest. Hosting of edgebioinformatics.org is

provided by Cyverse, which is supported by the National Science Foundation under

Award Numbers DBI-0735191, DBI-1265383, and DBI-1743442. We acknowledge

Figure 1. Visualization of in silico evaluation of diagnostic assays. (A) Dashboard

the authors and originators of sequences from the submitting laboratories who have

including a bar chart and table with per-assay recall and mismatch counts; (B) Phylogenetic

contributed to the GISAID database.

tree created from high-quality genomes color-labeled by continent; (C) A heatmap display

of assay assessment per assay per genome; (D) Assay details and statistics of genomes with

mismatches; (E) Detailed assay evaluation results, including alignments and

Funding

thermodynamic information.

This research was supported by LANL (20200732ER), by DTRA (CB10152 and

CB10623) and by the DOE Office of Science (KP160101), through the National

Per-assay recall values are summarized in the dashboard (Fig. 1A). The
assays with the best recall rates are shown in a bar chart, which also
displays detailed mismatch counts. The total mismatch and failure results
are summarized in the per-assay table of aggregated data. Selecting any
bar in the chart or assay in the table will display additional information on
the distribution of targets with mismatches (Fig. 1D).

Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory, a consortium of DOE national laboratories

focused on response to COVID-19, with funding provided by the Coronavirus

CARES Act.

References

CDC (2020) 2019-Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic

A phylogenetic tree (Fig. 1B), created using PhaME (Shakya et al.
2020), is derived from genomes defined by GISAID as high-quality (<1%
Ns and <0.05% unique mutations). The leaves on the tree are represented
by the genome labels and color-coded by geographic location. Mousing
over the genome labels displays metadata associated with the sample.
Identical SARS-CoV-2 sequences are clustered and represented as
collapsed branches in the tree. The heatmap (Fig. 1C), color-coded to
indicate the number of mismatches, shows analysis of every combination
of assay and SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence. Selecting an individual cell
of the heatmap displays detailed pairwise alignment information (Fig. 1E).
This visualization is rendered using a custom PhyD3 phylogenetic tree
viewer (Kreft et al., 2017).

Panel For Emergency Use Only: Instructions for Use. Centers for Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
Accessed:
May
11,
2020.

Clark, K. et al. (2015) GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 44, D67–D72.
Corman, V. et al. (2020) Diagnostic detection of 2019-nCoV by real-time RT-PCR.

Protocol. Accessed: May 11, 2020.
source/coronaviruse/protocol-v2-1.pdf
Gans, J.D. and Wolinsky, M. (2008) Improved assay-dependent searching of nucleic

acid sequence databases. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, 1–5.
Holland, M. et al. (2020) BioLaboro: A bioinformatics system for detecting

molecular assay signature erosion and designing new assays in response to
emerging and reemerging pathogens. bioRxiv, 2020.04.08.031963.
Kreft, Ł. et al. (2017) PhyD3: a phylogenetic tree viewer with extended phyloXML

support for functional genomics data visualization. Bioinformatics, 33, 2946–
2947.
Shakya, M. et al. (2020) Standardized phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary

3 Discussion

analysis applied to species across the microbial tree of life. Sci. Rep., 10, 1723.
Shu, Y. and McCauley, J. (2017) GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all influenza

Few other public resources exist for assessing the performance of PCR-
based SARS-CoV-2 assays. GISAID, one of the primary repositories for
SARS-CoV-2 genomes, provides a high-level summary of PCR-based
assay performance for registered users. However, this information is
provided in the form of a static image with only a limited amount of
information. The virological.org website provides static tables
summarizing the high-level performance of PCR assays that have been
periodically uploaded (Holland et al., 2020). Unlike these resources, the
web-based application presented here provides a more detailed and

data - from vision to reality. Euro Surveill., 22.
Vogels, C.B., et al. (2020) Analytical sensitivity and efficiency comparisons of

SARS-COV-2 qRT-PCR assays. medRxiv.

Name
5-Forward-3’
5’-Reverse-3’
5’-Probe-3’

source/coronaviruse/peiris-protocol-16-1-
20.pdf?sfvrsn=af1aac73_4

source/coronaviruse/peiris-protocol-16-1-
20.pdf?sfvrsn=af1aac73_4

mismatch to the N3 assay (Fig. S5). Most of these strains originate
from Asia and Oceania, with a few in North American and Europe.
The majority of these strains were collected in early March,
corroborating a common origin for this clade. The remainder of
strains with this mutation do not appear to share an obviously
delineated clade (Fig. S6), but many of these originate from Asia
and Oceania and many have a collection date of late February and
early March (with some as early as January) suggesting an earlier
origin for the mutation in this group.
Other small clusters of mutations abound. There is a small clade
of 23 sequences that cause failure of the N1 assay due to 3
mismatches on the probe (Fig. S7). These bases (ACC) are on the
first three bases of the probe opposite TGA (Fig. S8). While C-A
is a literal mismatch, the remaining two bases should not pair due
to the thermodynamic unfavorability of their position on the end
of an oligo. The majority of these sequences originate in Oceania
in early March. There does not appear to be nearby clades with
mismatches, so this group appears to have emerged fairly rapidly.
This is the type of development that will potentially lead to
obsolescence of assays, and so the ability to track these types of
events is particularly valuable.
Here we have presented a web-based tool for visual and
quantitative predictive assessment and validation of PCR assays
that are designed to detect SARS-CoV-2. The tool we have
described provides an easy-to-read visual representation of assay
performance with respect to the target genomes and the
evolutionary relationship between the genomes. This web
application will thus offer utility to policy makers, health officials,
and other stakeholders in making decisions about COVID-19
testing and tracking of the SARS-CoV-2 virus.