CiwGAN and ﬁwGAN: Encoding information in acoustic data to model
lexical learning with Generative Adversarial Networks

Gaˇsper Beguˇsa

aDepartment of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, 1203 Dwinelle Hall #2650, Berkeley, CA 94720

Abstract

arXiv:2006.02951v3 [cs.CL] 28 Jul 2021

How can deep neural networks encode information that corresponds to words in human speech
into raw acoustic data? This paper proposes two neural network architectures for modeling un-
supervised lexical learning from raw acoustic inputs: ciwGAN (Categorical InfoWaveGAN) and
ﬁwGAN (Featural InfoWaveGAN). These combine Deep Convolutional GAN architecture for au-
dio data (WaveGAN; Donahue et al. 2019) with the information theoretic extension of GAN —
InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016) — and propose a new latent space structure that can model featural
learning simultaneously with a higher level classiﬁcation and allows for a very low-dimension vector
representation of lexical items. In addition to the Generator and Discriminator networks, the ar-
chitectures introduce a network that learns to retrieve latent codes from generated audio outputs.
Lexical learning is thus modeled as emergent from an architecture that forces a deep neural network
to output data such that unique information is retrievable from its acoustic outputs. The networks
trained on lexical items from the TIMIT corpus learn to encode unique information corresponding
to lexical items in the form of categorical variables in their latent space. By manipulating these
variables, the network outputs speciﬁc lexical items. The network occasionally outputs innovative
lexical items that violate training data, but are linguistically interpretable and highly informative
for cognitive modeling and neural network interpretability. Innovative outputs suggest that pho-
netic and phonological representations learned by the network can be productively recombined and
directly paralleled to productivity in human speech: a ﬁwGAN network trained on suit and dark
outputs innovative start, even though it never saw start or even a [st] sequence in the training data.
We also argue that setting latent featural codes to values well beyond training range results in
almost categorical generation of prototypical lexical items and reveals underlying values of each la-
tent code. Probing deep neural networks trained on well understood dependencies in speech bears
implications for latent space interpretability and understanding how deep neural networks learn
meaningful representations, as well as potential for unsupervised text-to-speech generation in the
GAN framework.

Keywords:
artiﬁcial intelligence, generative adversarial networks, speech, lexical learning, neural
network interpretability, acoustic word embedding

1.
Introduction

How human language learners encode information in their speech is among the core questions
in linguistics and computational cognitive science. Acoustic speech data is the primary source of
linguistic input for hearing infants, and ﬁrst language learners must learn to retrieve information
from raw acoustic data. By the time language acquisition is complete, learners are able to not only

Email address: (Gaˇsper Beguˇs)

analyze but also produce speech consisting of words (henceforth lexical items) that carry meaning
(Saﬀran et al., 1996, 2007; Kuhl, 2010). In other words, speakers learn to encode information in their
acoustic output, and they do so by associating meaning-bearing units of speech (lexical items) with
unique information. Lexical items in turn consist of units called phonemes that represent individual
sounds. In fact, speakers not only produce lexical items that exist in their primary linguistic data,
but are also able to generate new lexical items that consist of novel combinations of phonemes that
conform to the phonotactic rules of their language. This points to one of the core properties of
language: productivity (Hockett, 1959; Piantadosi and Fedorenko, 2017; Baroni, 2020).

1.1. Prior work
Computational approaches to lexical learning have a long history. Modeling lexical learning
can take many forms (for a comprehensive overview, see R¨as¨anen 2012), but the shift towards
modeling lexical learning from acoustic data, especially from raw unreduced acoustic data, has
occurred relatively recently (Levin et al. 2013; Lee et al. 2015; Chung et al. 2016; Shafaei-Bajestan
and Baayen 2018; Kamper 2019; Chorowski et al. 2019; Baayen et al. 2019, i.a.). Previously, the
majority of models operated on either fully abstracted or already simpliﬁed features extracted from
raw acoustic data. A variety of models have been proposed for this task including, among others,
Bayesian and connectionist approaches (see, among others Goldwater et al. 2009; Feldman et al.
2009; R¨as¨anen 2012; Heymann et al. 2013; Lee and Glass 2012; Elsner et al. 2013; Feldman et al.
2013; Lee et al. 2015; Arnold et al. 2017; Kamper et al. 2017; Shafaei-Bajestan and Baayen 2018;
Baayen et al. 2019; Chuang et al. 2020).
As summarized in Lee et al. (2015), existing models of lexical learning that take some form of
acoustic data as input can be divided into “spoken term discovery” models and “models of word
segmentation” (Lee et al., 2015, 390). Proposals of the ﬁrst approach most commonly involve the
clustering of similarities in acoustic data to establish a set of phonetic units from which lexical items
are then established, again based on clustering. The word segmentation models, on the other hand,
“start from unsegmented strings of symbols and attempt to identify subsequences corresponding to
lexical items” (Lee et al. 2015, 390; for evaluation of the models, see also Levin et al. 2013). The
models can take as inputs acoustic data pre-segmented at the word level (as in the current paper
and Kamper et al. 2014; Chung et al. 2016) or acoustic inputs of unsegmented speech (e.g. in Lee
et al. 2015; R¨as¨anen et al. 2015; R¨as¨anen and Bland´on 2020).
Weakly supervised and unsupervised deep neural network models operating on acoustic data
have recently been used to model phonetic learning (R¨as¨anen et al., 2016; Alishahi et al., 2017;
Eloﬀet al., 2019; Shain and Elsner, 2019; Chung et al., 2020), but not learning of phonological
processes. Evidence for phonemic representation in deep neural networks, for example, emerges in
a weakly supervised model that combines visual and auditory information (Alishahi et al., 2017).
Several prominent autoencoder models that are trained to represent data in a lower-dimensionality
space have recently been proposed (R¨as¨anen et al., 2016; Eloﬀet al., 2019; Shain and Elsner,
2019; Chorowski et al., 2019).
Clustering analyses of the reduced space in these autoencoder
models suggest that the networks learn approximates to phonetic features. The disadvantage of
the autoencoder architecture is that outputs reproduce inputs as closely as possible: the network’s
outputs are directly connected to its inputs, which is not an ideal setting for language acquisition.
Furthermore, current proposals in the autoencoder framework do not model phonological processes,
and there is only an indirect relationship between phonetic properties and latent space.
A prominent framework for modeling lexical learning is acoustic word embedding models that
include various (mostly unsupervised) methods (Levin et al., 2013; Kamper et al., 2014) including
deep neural networks (Chung et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2020; Baevski et al., 2020; Niekerk et al., 2020).
Similar to the phone-level autoencoder models, the goal of the acoustic word embedding models is a

parsimonious encoding of lexical items that maps acoustic input into a ﬁxed dimensionality vector
(Levin et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2016). The models can be used for unsupervised lexical learning
and spoken term discovery in low resource languages (e.g. the Zerospeech challenge; Dunbar et al.
2017; Dunbar et al. 2019, 2020). Several models within this framework employ the autoencoder
architecture, where the latent space reduced in dimensionality can serve as a vector representing
acoustic lexical items (Chung et al., 2016; Kamper, 2019; Niekerk et al., 2020).
Chung et al.
(2016) show that averaged latent representations can correspond to phonetic representations, but
in order to get these results they additionally perform dimensionality reduction on the latent space.
Similarly, Chorowski et al. (2019) use a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) in
which the encoder outputs categorical values constituting token identity. Chorowski et al. (2019)
argue that token identities match phoneme identities with relative high frequencies (see also Niekerk
et al. 2020; Chung et al. 2020). Chen and Hain (2020) argue that a convolutional encoder outputs
a higher quality of audio compared to the RNN architectures that most of the mentioned proposals
use.
One of the major contributions of these models is the facilitation of unsupervised automatic
speech recognition (ASR) for zero resource languages, which is why their evaluation focuses on
metrics such as the word discrimination/error tasks (e.g. Levin et al. 2013; Chung et al. 2016;
Kamper 2019; Chen and Hain 2020; Niekerk et al. 2020; Baevski et al. 2020) or naturalness of the
outputs (e.g. Eloﬀet al. 2019; Chen and Hain 2020; Niekerk et al. 2020). A subset of proposals
explores interpretability of the latent space and generated outputs (see Chung et al. 2016; Chorowski
et al. 2019), but they focus on the entire latent space rather than on individual variables or their
direct inﬂuence on generated outputs. Moreover, the acoustic word embedding models still operate
with relatively high dimensional vectors (substantially higher than in the ﬁwGAN architecture; see
Section 3.4) and their interpretation often includes the entire latent vector or requires additional
dimensionality reduction techniques. To my knowledge, exploration of how individual variables in
these vectors correspond to linguistically meaningful units or how we can elicit categorical behavior
(see Section 3.3.2) is absent.
Finally, while autoencoders are generative and unsupervised, they crucially diﬀer from GANs
in that the encoder does have direct access to the data. Additionally, autoencoders are trained on
replicating data rather than on learning to generate data from noise in an unsupervised manner.
In other words, autoencoders are unsupervised in terms of encoding data representations in the
latent space, but the data generation part (decoders) is supervised in the autoencoder architecture.
GANs, on the other hand, are unsupervised also in the sense of data generation. This distinction
is primarily relevant for the cognitive modeling aspect of the proposal.
The ideal cognitive model of lexical learning would include both the production and the per-
ception aspect.
Here we focus on evaluating generated outputs and on the interpretability of
the latent space; we leave the question of how the Q-network performs on lexical item identiﬁca-
tion/discrimination for future work. This brings some limitations in terms of model comparison
— we lack information on how well a GAN-based unsupervised lexical learner performs on word
discrimination tasks compared to, for example, the autoencoder architecture. It is reasonable to
assume that GAN-based models would perform worse on word discrimination tasks compared to
autoencoders in which both the encoder and decoder have direct access to the training data. The
Generator and the Q-network in the proposed architecture do not have a direct access to the training
data — the Generator has only a very indirect access to the data by being trained on maximizing
the error of the Discriminator that aims to estimate Wasserstein distance between generated and
real data. Additionally, the ﬁwGAN and ciwGAN models proposed here have substantially more
reduced latent representations (from 5 to 13 variables total). This likely negatively aﬀects the word
discrimination, and as such, the evaluation of discrimination is left for future work.

Another advantage of the GAN architecture is that the networks generate innovative data
rather than replicates of data. We can thus probe learning by analyzing how GANs innovate, how
they violate data distributions, and what can these innovative outputs tell us about their learning.
Additionally, we focus on exploring how manipulating the latent space (as proposed in Beguˇs
2020a) can elicit generation of unique lexical items at categorical levels, what eﬀects individual
latent variables have on outputs, and what this manipulation can tell us about lexical learning in
deep convolutional networks.

1.2. GANs and language acquisition
The main characteristics of the GAN architecture (Goodfellow et al., 2014) are two networks:
the Generator and the Discriminator.
The Generator generates data from latent space that is
reduced in dimensionality (e.g. from a set of uniformly distributed variables z). The Discrimi-
nator network learns to distinguish between “real” training data and generated outputs from the
Generator network. The Generator is trained to maximize the Discriminator’s error rate; the Dis-
criminator is trained to minimize its own error rate. In the DCGAN proposal (Radford et al.,
2015), the two networks are deep convolutional networks. Recently, the DCGAN proposal was
transformed to model audio data in WaveGAN (Donahue et al., 2019). The main architecture of
WaveGAN is identical to that of DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015), with the main diﬀerence being
that the Generator outputs a one-dimensional vector corresponding to time series data (raw acous-
tic output) and the Discriminator takes one-dimensional acoustic data as its input (as opposed to
two-dimensional visual data in DCGAN). WaveGAN also adopts the Wasserstein GAN proposal for
a cost function in GANs that improves training (Arjovsky et al., 2017). Instead of estimating the
probability of whether the output is generated or real, WGAN estimates the Wasserstein distance
between generated data and real data.
Beguˇs (2020a) models speech acquisition as a dependency between latent space and generated
outputs in the GAN architecture.
The paper proposes a technique for identifying latent vari-
ables that correspond to meaningful phonetic/phonological features in the output. The Generator
network learns to encode phonetically and phonologically meaningful representations, such as the
presence of a segment in the output, with a subset of variables, i.e. with reduced representation.
Using the technique proposed in Beguˇs (2020a), we can identify individual variables that corre-
spond to, for example, a sound [s] in the output. By manipulating these identiﬁed variables to
values that are beyond the training range, we can force [s] in the output. Interpolating the values
has an almost linear eﬀect on the amplitude of frication noise of [s] in the output.
One of the advantages of the proposal in Beguˇs (2020a) is that the model learns phonological
alternations, i.e. context-dependent changes in the realization of speech sounds, simultaneously
with learning acoustic properties of human speech. The WaveGAN model (Donahue et al., 2019) is
trained on a simple phonological process: aspiration of stops /p, t, k/ conditioned on the presence
of [s] in the input. English voiceless stops /p, t, k/ are aspirated (produced with a puﬀof air [ph,
th, kh]) word-initially before a stressed vowel (e.g. in pit ["phIt]) except if an [s] precedes the stop
(e.g. spit ["spIt]) A computational experiment suggests that the network learns this distribution,
but imperfectly so. The network learns to output shorter aspiration duration when [s] is present, in
line with distributions in the training data. Outputs, however, also violate data in a manner that
can be directly paralleled to language acquisition. Occasionally, the Generator network outputs
aspiration durations that are longer in the [s] condition than in any example in the training data:
the generator outputs [sphIt], which violates the phonological rule in English. In other words, the
network violates the distributions in the training data, and these violations correspond directly to
phonological acquisition stages: children acquiring English start with signiﬁcantly longer aspiration
durations in the [s]-condition, e.g. [sphIt] (Bond and Wilson, 1980).

In sum, GANs have been shown to represent phonetically or phonologically meaningful informa-
tion in the latent space that has approximate equivalent in phonetic/phonological representations
and language acquisition (Beguˇs, 2020a). The latent variables can be actively manipulated to gen-
erate data with or without some phonetic/phonological property. These representations, however,
are exclusively limited to the phonetic/phonological level in Beguˇs (2020a) and contain no lexical
information.

1.3. Goals

Despite several advantages, to our knowledge, lexical learning has not yet been modeled with
Generative Adversarial Neural network models and perhaps even more generally, with unsupervised
generative deep convolutional networks. Donahue et al. (2019) train the WaveGAN architecture
on Speech Commands Zero Through Nine (SC09) dataset and argues that the network learns to
generate speech-like outputs with high naturalness and inception scores. Donahue et al. (2019),
however, do not explore internal representations and their architecture does not include the Q-
network (InfoGAN; Chen et al. 2016), which means the proposal does not model lexical learning
or how the network encodes linguistically meaningful representations. As discussed in Section 1.1,
most other models operate with recurrent neural networks rather than with convolutional networks
and use the autoencoder architecture.1

In this paper, we follow the proposal in Beguˇs (2020a) that phonetic and phonological acquisition
can be modeled as a dependency between latent space and generated data in the GAN architecture
and add a lexical learning component to the model. We modify the WaveGAN architecture and add
the InfoGAN’s Q-network (based partially on implementation in Rodionov 2018) to computationally
simulate lexical learning from raw acoustic data. In other words, we introduce a deep convolutional
network that learns to retrieve the Generator’s latent code and propose a new latent space structure
that can model featural learning (ﬁwGAN). The ﬁwGAN architecture additionally allows a very
low dimension categorical vector representation of lexical items (e.g. n number of features allows 2n

number of unique classes). We train the networks on highly variable training data: manually sliced
lexical items from the TIMIT database (Garofolo et al., 1993) that includes over 600 speakers from
diﬀerent dialectal backgrounds in American English. We present four computational experiments:
on ﬁve lexical items in the ciwGAN architecture (Section 3.1), on ten lexical items in the ciwGAN
architecture (Section 3.2), on eight lexical items in the ﬁwGAN architecture (Section 3.3), and on
the entire TIMIT database (6,229 lexical items) in the ﬁwGAN architecture (Section 3.4). Evidence
for lexical learning emerges in all four experiments. The paper also features a section describing
how to directly follow learning strategies of the Generator network (Section 3.1.2), a section on
featural learning that discusses innovative outputs and productivity of the model (Section 3.3.1),
and a section that proposes a technique for retrieving near categorical underlying representation
of the latent variables in GANs (Section 3.3.2). We argue that exploration of innovative outputs
and the latent space of deep neural networks trained on dependencies on speech data that are
well understood (due to extensive study of human phonetics and phonology in the past decades)
provides unique insights both for cognitive modeling and for neural network interpretability.
Lexical learning is modeled in the following way: a deep convolutional network learns to retrieve
information from innovative outputs generated by a separate Generator network. The Generator
network thus learns to generate data such that unique lexical information is retrievable from its
acoustic outputs. Lexical learning is not per se incorporated in the model: instead, lexical learning

1A deep convolutional autoencoder model architecture based on WaveNet proposed in Chen and Hain (2020) was
released after submission of this paper.

emerges because the most informative way to generate outputs given speech data as input is to
encode unique information into lexical items. The end result of the model is a Generator network
that generates innovative data — raw acoustic outputs — such that each lexical item is represented
by a unique code.
Because the model diverges substantially from existing proposals of lexical
learning, we leave direct comparison of its performance (such as on ABX test) for future work.
Instead, we propose to evaluate success in the model’s performance in lexical learning with an
inferential statistical technique — multinomial logistic regression (Section 3.1).
Representing semantic information can take many forms in computational models.
In the
current proposal, unique lexical items are represented with either a one-hot vector in the ciwGAN
architecture or a binary code in the ﬁwGAN architecture. In other words, the objective of the
model is to associate each unique lexical item in the training data with a unique representation.
For example, in a corpus with four words, word1 can be associated with a representation [1, 0, 0,
0], word2 with [0, 1, 0, 0], word3 with [0, 0, 1, 0] in the ciwGAN architecture. In the ﬁwGAN
architecture, word1 can be associated with [0, 0], word2 with [0, 1], word3 with [1, 0], and word4
with [1, 1].
The model of lexical learning proposed here features some desirable properties.
First, the
network is trained exclusively on raw unannotated acoustic data. Second, lexical learning emerges
from the requirement on a deep convolutional network to output informative data. Only because
associating a unique code in the latent space with lexical items is the optimal way to encode
information such that another network will be able to retrieve it does the lexical learning emerge.
Third, the model is fully generative: a deep convolutional network (the Generator) generates raw
acoustic outputs that correspond to lexical items in the training data. Crucially, the Generator
network in the model does not simply replicate training data, but generates innovative outputs,
because its main task is to increase the error rate of the network that distinguishes real from
generated data (the Discriminator) and its outputs are not directly connected to the training data.
Occasionally, the Generator outputs innovative data that violate distributions of the training data,
but are linguistically interpretable and highly informative. The model thus features one of the basic
properties of language: productivity. This allows us to compare lexical and phonological acquisition
in language-acquiring children to the innovative generated data in the proposed computational
model. The ﬁwGAN architecture has an additional advantage: it can model featural learning in
addition to a higher level classiﬁcation. This means that featural representations in phonology and
phonetics can be modeled simultaneously with lexical learning.
To be sure, there are also undesirable aspects of the model. In particular, the model’s perfor-
mance is optimal when the number of lexical classes that the network is predetermined. However,
as the experiment in Section 3.4 suggests, even with the mismatch between the number of classes
and the number of unique items, the networks show evidence for lexical learning. Also, while the
model learns from raw acoustic inputs, the individual lexical items in training data are sliced from
the corpus (sliced at the lexical level rather on the phone level) instead of inferred by the model.
These disadvantages are not insurmountable, but are left to be addressed in future work.
The proposed architectures and results of the computational experiments have implications
for deep neural network interpretability as well as some basic implications for NLP applications.
Beside modeling lexical learning, the novel latent space structure in the ﬁwGAN architecture can
be employed as a general purpose unsupervised simultaneous feature extractor and classiﬁer for
audio data. We also propose a technique for exploring latent space representations: we argue that
manipulating latent codes to marginal values that substantially excess the training range reveals
underlying values for each latent code. Outputs generated with the proposed technique feature
little variability and have the potential to reveal learning representations of the Generator network.
The proposed model also allows a ﬁrst step towards unsupervised text-to-speech synthesis at the

lexical level using GANs: the Generator outputs speciﬁc lexical items when latent codes are set to
diﬀerent values.

2. Model

We propose a GAN architecture that combines WaveGAN with the InfoGAN proposal (Chen
et al., 2016).
The objective of Generative Adversarial Networks is a function that maps from
randomly-distributed latent space to outputs that resemble training data (the Generator network).
To ﬁnd such a function, the Generator and the Discriminator networks are trained in a minimax
game in which the Discriminator’s (D) loss is maximized and the Generator’s (G) loss is minimized
(Goodfellow et al., 2014). In the original GAN proposal (Goodfellow et al., 2014), the Discriminator
is trained on classifying real and fake data. In the Wasserstein GAN proposal that is adopted in this
paper (as well as in Donahue et al. 2019) and that substantially improves training, the Discriminator
is trained on minimizing the Wasserstein distance between the generated and real data distributions
(Arjovsky et al., 2017). The value function can be formalized as (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Donahue
et al., 2019):

VWGAN(D, G) = Ex∼PX[Dw(x)] −Ez∼PZ[Dw(G(z))],
(1)

where x is real data from some data distribution (PX) and z is latent space from a random
distribution (PZ; in our case the uniform distribution). To improve performance, the models are
additionally trained with a gradient penalty term λEˆx∼Pˆx[(||▽ˆxDw(ˆx)||2−1)2], where Pˆx is a uniform
probability distribution in the interval [0, 1] which is used to sample from the diﬀerence between
the real and generated data distributions (ˆx) to get the gradient penalty and λ is a constant set
at 10 (for advantages of such a gradient penalty term over weight clipping, see the WGAN-GP
proposal in Gulrajani et al. 2017).
InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016) is a proposal within the GAN framework that aims to increase
mutual information between a subset of latent space — the code variables (c or φ) — and gener-
ated outputs (G(z, c)) (Chen et al., 2016). In this paper, we adopt the main objectives from the
Wasserstein proposal (1) and add to the model maximization of mutual information between the
code variables in the latent space and the generated outputs I(c; G(z, c)). Because I(c; G(z, c)) is
diﬃcult to estimate, Chen et al. (2016) instead propose to approximate its variational lower bound
λLI(G, Q) (with a hyperparameter λ; for details, see Chen et al. 2016). Our model can thus be
formalized as (based on Chen et al. 2016 and Gulrajani et al. 2017; see also 1):

min
G,Q max
D VIWGAN(D, G, Q) = VWGAN(D, G) −λLI(G, Q).
(2)

To implement this model, the proposed ciwGAN and ﬁwGAN architectures involve three deep
convolutional networks:
the Generator, the Discriminator, and the Q-network (or the lexical
learner). The models are based on WaveGAN (Donahue et al., 2019), an implementation of the
DCGAN architecture (Radford et al., 2015) for audio data and the InfoGAN proposal (Chen et al.,
2016).2 Unlike in most InfoGAN implementations, the Q-network is a separate deep convolutional
network.3

2Barry and Kim (2019) in a recent presentation model piano playing with InfoWaveGAN. Their proposal, however,
focuses on continuous variables and feature only one categorical latent variable with no apparent function. It is unclear
from the poster what the architecture of their proposal is.
3The InfoGAN model based on DCGAN in Rodionov (2018) also proposes the Q-network to be a separate network.

Input variables
97 random variables (z)
z1−97 ∼U(−1, 1)

Backpropagation

3 features (cat. variables) φ
for 2n classes (= 8)

ˆx =
Generator
network

φ1
φ2
φ3
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
...
1
1
1

G(z)

φ =

Q network

Discriminator
network

Generated
or real?

Estimates ˆφ
[φ1, φ2, φ3]

D(x)

Backpropagation
Backpropagation

x =

Training data

8 lexical items

TIMIT database

Figure 1: Architecture of ﬁwGAN: green trapezoids represent deep convolutional neural networks; purple squares
illustrate inputs to each of the three networks. The Generator network takes 3 latent features φ (constituting binary
code) and 97 latent variables z uniformly distributed (z ∼U(−1, 1)) as its input. The Generator outputs a vector
of 16384 values (ˆx) that constitute approximately 1 s of audio ﬁle (sampled at 16000 Hz). The Discriminator takes
generated data (ˆx) and real data and estimates the Wasserstein distance between them. The Q-network (lexical
learner) takes generated data as its input and outputs estimates of the unique feature values that the Generator uses
for generation of each data point.

In the GAN architecture, the Generator network usually takes as its input a number of uni-
formly distributed latent variables (z ∼U(−1, 1)). In the InfoGAN proposal (Chen et al., 2016),
the Generator’s input additionally includes a latent code: a set of binary variables that consti-
tutes a one-hot vector as well as uniformly distributed code variables. Because we model lexical
learning, we exclude uniformly distributed code variables. While the binary variables in InfoGAN
implementations usually constitute a one-hot vector, we propose two diﬀerent architectures. The
ciwGAN architecture includes a one-hot vector as its latent code (c); but in the ﬁwGAN archi-
tecture, we introduce binary code as the categorical input (labeled as φ).4 This new structure in
the ﬁwGAN latent space allows the network to treat the binary variables as features, where each
variable corresponds to one feature (φn). As a consequence, the two networks diﬀer in how the
Q-network is trained. In ciwGAN, the Q-network is trained on retrieving information from the
Generator’s output with a softmax function in its ﬁnal layer. In ﬁwGAN, the categorical variables
or features are binomially distributed and the Q-network is trained to retrieve information with a
sigmoid function in the ﬁnal layer accordingly. In sum, the Generator in our proposal takes two
sets of variables as its input (latent space): (i) categorical variables (c or φ) which constitute a
one-hot vector (ciwGAN) or a binary code (ﬁwGAN) and (ii) random variables z that are uniformly
distributed (z ∼U(−1, 1)). Figure 1 illustrates the ﬁwGAN architecture. The code is available at

4For a diﬀerent kind of binarization that applies to the entire latent space in the variational autoencoder archi-
tecture, see Eloﬀet al. (2019).

The Generator network is a ﬁve-layer deep convolutional network (from WaveGAN; Donahue
et al. 2019) that takes the input variables (referred to as the latent variables or the latent space)
and outputs a 1D vector of 16,384 data points that constitute just over 1 second of acoustic audio
output with 16 kHz sampling rate. These generated outputs are fed to the Discriminator network
and the Q-network. The Discriminator network takes raw audio as its input: both generated data
and real data sliced at the lexical level from the TIMIT database (Garofolo et al., 1993). It is trained
on estimating the Wasserstein distance between generated and real data distributions, according
to Arjovsky et al. (2017). It outputs “realness” scores which estimate how far from the real data
distribution an input is (Brownlee, 2019). The Generator’s objective is to increase the error rate
of the Discriminator such that the Discriminator assigns a high “realness” score to its generated
outputs.
To model lexical learning, we add the Q-network to the architecture (InfoGAN; Chen et al.
2016). As already mentioned, the Q-network is independent of the Discriminator network in the
proposed architecture.
A separate Q-network is in fact desirable as it enables exploration and
probing of internal representations that are limited to lexical learning and are dissociated from the
function of the Discriminator. In future work, we can thus test the Q-network on discriminative
tasks (such as ABX) and probe its representations that are limited to lexical learning and are not
inﬂuenced by the Discriminator’s function (of estimating realness scores). The Q-network is in its
architecture identical to the Discriminator. It takes only generated outputs (G(z)) as its input in
the form of 16384 data points (approximately 1 s of audio data sampled at 16 kHz). The Q-network
has 5 convolutional layers. The only diﬀerence between the Discriminator and the Q-network is
that the ﬁnal layer in the Q-network includes n number of nodes, where n corresponds to the
number of categorical variables (c in ciwGAN) or features (φ in ﬁwGAN) in the latent space.
The Q-network is trained on estimating the categorical part of the latent space (c- or φ-values).
Its output is thus a unique code that approximates the latent code in the Generator’s latent
space — either a one-hot vector or a binary code.
The training objective of the Q-network is
to approximate the unique latent code in the Generator’s hidden input. The loss function of the
Q-network is to minimize the diﬀerence between the estimated c- or φ-values that correspond to
the nodes in the last fully connected layer and the actual c- or φ-values in the latent space of
the Generator. At each evaluation, weights of the Q-network as well as the Generator network
are updated with cross-entropy according to the loss function of the Q-network. This forces the
Generator to generate data, such that the latent code or latent features (c or φ) will be retrievable:
the Generator’s objective is to maximize the success rate of the Q-network.
The Generator is
additionally trained on maximizing the error rate of the Discriminator. The training proceeds as
follows: the Discriminator network is updated ﬁve times, followed by an update of the Generator
based on the Discriminator’s loss and an update of the Generator together with the Q-network to
minimize the Q-network’s loss. The Generator and the Discriminator networks are trained with
the Adam optimizer, whereas the Q-network is trained with the RMSProp algorithm (with the
learning rate set at .0001 for all optimizers). The minibatch size is 64.
To summarize the architecture, the Discriminator network learns to distinguish “realness” of
generated speech samples. The Generator is trained to maximize the loss function of the Discrimi-
nator. The Q-network (or the lexical learner network) is trained on retrieving the categorical part
of the latent code in the Generator’s output based on only the Generator’s acoustic outputs. Be-
cause the weights of the Q-network as well as the Generator are updated based on the Q-network’s
loss function, the Generator learns to associate lexical items with a unique latent code (one-hot
vector or binary code), so that the Q-network can retrieve the code from the acoustic signal only.
This learning that resembles lexical learning is unsupervised: the association between the code in
the latent space and individual lexical items arises from training and is not pre-determined. In

principle, the Generator could associate any acoustic property with the latent code, but it would
make it harder for the Q-network to retrieve the information if the Generator encoded some other
distribution with its latent code.
The association between a unique code value and individual
lexical item that the Generator outputs thus emerges from the training.
The result of the training in the architecture outlined in Figure 1 is a Generator network
that outputs raw acoustic data that resemble real data from the TIMIT database, such that the
Discriminator becomes unsuccessful in assigning “realness” scores (Brownlee, 2019). Crucially, the
Generator’s outputs are never a full replication of the input: the Generator outputs innovative data
that resemble input data, but also violate many of the distributions in a linguistically interpretable
manner (Beguˇs, 2020a). In addition to outputting innovative data that resemble speech in the input,
the Generator also learns to associate each lexical item with a unique code in its latent space. This
means that by setting the code to a certain value, the network should output a particular lexical
item to the exclusion of other lexical items.
There are two supervised aspects of the model. First, the network is trained on manually sliced
lexical items and does not perform slicing from a continuous speech stream in an unsupervised
manner. Addressing this disadvantage is left for future work (see the work on this topic in Lee
et al. 2015; R¨as¨anen et al. 2015; R¨as¨anen and Bland´on 2020). Second, the model performs best
when the number of lexical items in the training data matches the number of classes predetermined
in the model. For example, a one-hot vector in the ciwGAN architecture with 5 variables is used
to categorize 5 lexical items. We feed the network with 5 diﬀerent lexical items from the TIMIT
database. In the ﬁwGAN architecture, n features (φ) are used to categorize 2n classes. For example,
3 features φ allow 23 = 8 classes and we feed the network 8 diﬀerent lexical items. However, as is
suggested by the experiment in Section 3.4, the Generator learns to associate single lexical items
with a given latent code even if there is a high mismatch between the number of classes and the
number of lexical items. In other words, that the number of classes and actual lexical items match
is not a hard requirement and evidence for lexical learning emerges even if the number of possible
classes is substantially higher than the number of actual items. One disadvantage in such a case
is that occasionally high frequency words can be associated with multiple codes (see discussion in
Section 3.4).

3. Experiments

3.1. ciwGAN on 5 lexical items
3.1.1. 8011 steps
The ﬁrst model is trained on the ciwGAN architecture with 5 lexical items from TIMIT: oily,
rag, suit, water, and year. The latent space of this network includes 5 categorical variables (c)
constituting a ﬁve-level one-hot vector and 95 random variables z. The ﬁve lexical items were
chosen based on frequency: they are chosen from the most frequent content words with at least 600
data points in TIMIT. A total of 3205 data points were used in training and each of the ﬁve items
has > 600 data points in the training data. The input data are 16-bit .wav slices of lexical items
(as annotated in TIMIT) sampled with 16 kHz rate. Input lexical items with counts are given in
Table 1.
To test whether the Generator network learns to associate each lexical item with a unique code,
the ciwGAN architecture is trained after 8011 (∼800 epochs) and 19244 steps (∼1921 epochs)
and 100 outputs are generated for each one-hot vector. Beguˇs (2020a) shows that manipulating
the latent space of the Generator network to values outside of the training interval can reveal
the underlying feature encoded with each variable. Additionally, Beguˇs (2020a) argues that the
relationship between the latent variables and meaningful phonetic properties can be almost linear.

word
IPA
data points
oily
["OIli]
638
rag
["ôæg]
638
suit
["sut]
630
water
["wORÄ]
649
year
["jIô]
650
Total
3205

Table 1: Five lexical items used for training in the ﬁve-word ciwGAN model with their corresponding IPA transcription
(based on general American English) and counts of data points for each item.

Based on these ﬁndings, the code variables (c) in the generated samples are manipulated not to 1
(as in the training stage), but rather to 2 when generating outputs. The rest of the latent space
(all z-variables) are sampled randomly, but kept constant across the ﬁve categorical variables.
One hundred outputs are thus generated for each unique code (e.g. [2, 0, 0, 0, 0], [0, 2, 0, 0,
0] ...).5 We analyze outcomes at two points during the training: after 8011 steps (∼800 epochs)
and after 19244 steps (∼1921 epochs). Since we are modeling language acquisition, we are not
interested in full convergence of the model: it is more informative to probe the network as it is being
trained. The number of steps at which we probe the networks is somewhat arbitrary, but the main
consideration in choosing the number of steps is a balance between interpretability of outputs and
minimizing the number of epochs (for a more detailed discussion, see Beguˇs 2020a). The outputs
were analyzed by a phonetically trained female speaker of American English who is not a co-author
in this research and was not aware of the exact details of the experiment. The results below are
reported based on the transcriber’s analysis as well as based on an acoustic analysis by the author.
Altogether, 1000 outputs are thus analyzed and transcribed.
Results of the analysis suggest that the network associates each unique code with a diﬀerent
lexical item. The success rate, however, diﬀers across lexical items. For example, when the latent
code is set at [0, 0, 0, 0, 2] the Generator trained after 8011 steps outputs samples that are tran-
scribed as rag in 98/100 cases. In other words, the Generator learns to associate [0, 0, 0, 0, 2] with
rag.6 The Generator thus not only learns to generate speech-like outputs, it also represents distinct
lexical items with a unique representation: information that can be retrieved from its outputs by
the lexical learning network. We can argue that [0, 0, 0, 0, 2] is the underlying representation of
rag.7

To determine the underlying code for each lexical item, we use success rates (or estimates from
the multinomial logistic regression model in Table 2 and Figure 4): the lexical item that is the most
frequent output for a given latent code is assumed to be associated with that latent code (e.g. rag
with [0, 0, 0, 0, 2]). Occasionally, a single lexical item is the most frequent output for two latent
codes. As will be shown below, it is likely the case that this reﬂects imperfect learning where the
underlying lexical item for a latent code is obscured by a more frequent output (perhaps the one
that is easier to distinguish from the data). In this case, we associate such codes to the lexical item
for which the given code outputs the highest proportion of that lexical item with respect to other
latent codes. For example, [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] outputs water most frequently with oily accounting for

5All acoustic analyses are performed in Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2015).
6Occasionally, a short vocalic element precedes the ["ôæg].
7In the remaining two cases, the outputs include [ô] in the initial position, which is followed by a diphthong [aI]
and a period of a consonantal closure. One output was transcribed as right.

approximately a quarter of outputs. The assumed lexical item for [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] is oily, because the
code that outputs water most frequently is [0, 0, 2, 0, 0], while highest proportion of oily relative to
other latent codes is for [0, 0, 0, 2, 0]. Observing the progress of lexical learning provides additional
evidence that oily is the underlying representation of [0, 0, 0, 2, 0]: as the training progresses the
network increases accuracy (see Section 3.1.2).
The success rate for the other four lexical items is lower than for rag, but the outputs that
deviate from the expected values are highly informative. For c = [2, 0, 0, 0, 0], the Generator (8011
steps) outputs 72/100 data points that can be reliably transcribed as suit. In seven additional
cases, the network outputs data points that can be transcribed with a sibilant [s] (79 total). In
these outputs, [s] is followed by a sequence that either cannot reliably be transcribed as suit or does
not correspond to suit, but rather to year (transcribed as sear [sIô]). The remaining 21 outputs do
not include the word for suit or a sibilant [s]. However, they are not randomly distributed across
other four lexical items either — they include lexical item year or its close approximation.8

An acoustic analysis of the training data reveals motivations for the innovative deviating out-
puts. As already mentioned, the network occasionally generates an innovative output, sear. The
sources of this innovation are likely four cases in the training data in which [j] in year ([jIô]) is
realized as a post-alveolar fricative [S], probably due to contextual inﬂuence (something that could
be transcribed as shear [SIô]). Figure 2 illustrates all four examples. The innovative generated
output sear diﬀers from the four examples in the training data in one crucial aspect: the frication
noise in the generated output is that of a post-alveolar [s] rather than that of a palato-alveolar [S].
Spectral analysis in Figure 2 clearly shows that the center of gravity in the generated output is
substantially higher than in the training data (which is characteristic of the alveolar fricative [s]).
The innovative sear output likely results from the fact that the training data contains four data
points that pose a learning problem: shear that features elements of suit and year. The innovative
generated sear [sIô] consequently features (i) frication noise that is approximately consistent with
suit [sut] and (ii) formant structure consistent with year [jIô]. It appears that the network treats sear
as a combination of the two lexical items. The network generates innovative outputs that combines
the two elements (sear [sIô]). Additionally, the sear output seems to be equally distributed among
the two latent codes, [2, 0, 0, 0, 0] representing suit and [0, 2, 0, 0, 0] representing year. In other
words, the error rate distribution of the two latent codes suggests that the network classiﬁes the
output sear as the combination of elements consistent with [2, 0, 0, 0, 0] and [0, 2, 0, 0, 0].
For c = [0, 2, 0, 0, 0], the Generator outputs 68 data points that can be reliably transcribed
as year or at least have a clear [Iô] sequence (without an [s]).9 22 outputs feature a sibilant [s].
In these 22 cases, 16 can reliably be transcribed as suit, while the others are mostly variants of
the innovative sear. The remaining cases (approximately 10) are diﬃcult to categorize based on
acoustic analysis.
For [0, 0, 2, 0, 0], the Generator outputs 84 data points that are transcribed as containing
water [wORÄ]. In approximately 15 of the 84 cases, the output involves an innovative combination
transcribed as watery Figure 3 illustrates one such case. Watery is an innovative output
that combines segment [i] from oily (["OIli]) with from water into a linguistically interpretable
innovation. This suggests that the Generator outputs a novel combination of segments, based on
analogy to oily. Unlike for sear, the training data contained no direct motivations based on which
watery could be formed.10

8For raw counts in this and other models, see Tables A.5, A.6, A.7, and A.8.
9The initial consonant is sometimes absent from transcriptions, but this is primarily because the glide interval is
acoustically not prominent, especially before [I].
10In 10 further cases of [0, 0, 2, 0, 0], the Generator outputs data points that contain a sequence oil ["OIl]. Tran-

Generated data
Training data from TIMIT

shear [SIô]

shear [SIô]

shear [SIô]

shear [SIô]

sear [sIô] [0, 2, 0, 0, 0]

8000

Frequency (Hz)

0

Time

Time

Time

Time

Time

Sound pressure level

0
8000
Frequency (Hz)

0
8000
Frequency (Hz)

8000
0

0
8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Figure 2: Waveforms (top), spectrograms (mid, from 0–8000 Hz), and 25 ms spectra (slices indicated in the spec-
trograms) (bottom) of four data points of the lexical item year with clear frication noise in the training data (from
TIMIT) and the generated innovative output sear.

Assumed word
Latent code c
Most frequent
%
2nd most freq.
%
Else
suit
[2, 0, 0, 0, 0]
suit ["sut]
72%
year ["jIô]
21%
7%
year
[0, 2, 0, 0, 0]
year ["jIô]
70%
suit ["sut]
12%
18%
water
[0, 0, 2, 0, 0]
water["wORÄ]
84%
oily ["OIli]
10%
6%
oily
[0, 0, 0, 2, 0]
water ["wORÄ]
61%
oily ["OIli]
26%
13%
rag
[0, 0, 0, 0, 2]
rag ["ôæg]
98%
—
—
2%

Table 2: Generated outputs and their percentages across the ﬁve one-hot vectors in the latent code. Transcriptions
of the outputs were coded as detailed in footnote 11.

Finally, for [0, 0, 0, 2, 0], the Generator outputs only 26 outputs that can reliably be transcribed
as oily ["OIli]. On the other hand, 61 outputs contain water. Oily is the less frequent output for [0,
0, 0, 2, 0] compared to water, but water is assigned to [0, 0, 2, 0, 0] because it is its most frequent
output, while [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] is the code that outputs the highest proportion of oily. This is why we
analyze oily as the underlying lexical item for the [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] code. Another evidence that oily
might underly the [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] code is that as the training progresses, the Generator increases the
number of outputs transcribed with oily for this code and decreases the number of outputs water
for the same code (see Section 3.1.2 and Figure 4). For a conﬁrmation that the proposed method
for assigning underlying assumed words for a given code based on annotated outputs yields valid
results, see Section 3.3.2.
To evaluate lexical learning in the ciwGAN model statistically, we analyze the results with a
multinomial logistic regression model. To test signiﬁcance of the latent code as the predictor of
the lexical item, annotations of the generated data were coded and ﬁt to a multinomial logistic
regression model using the nnet package (Venables and Ripley, 2002) in R Core Team (2018). The
dependent variable is the transcriptions of the generated outputs for the ﬁve lexical items and the
else condition.11 The independent variable is a single predictor: the latent code with the ﬁve levels

scription of the remaining 6 outputs is uncertain.
11The following conditions were used for coding the transcribed output: if the annotator transcribed an output as
containing “suit”, the coded lexical item was suit), if “ear” or “eer” (and no “s” immediately preceding), then year,

Generated data
Training data from TIMIT

watery [0, 0, 2, 0, 0]

oily ["OIli]

Training steps

4000

4000

8011

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
3.068
3.389
0

Time (s)
17.12
17.44
0

water [wORÄ] [0, 0, 2, 0, 0]

water [wORÄ]

4000

4000

19244

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
3.067
3.386
0

Time (s)
17.64
17.96
0

Figure 3: A waveform and spectrogram (0–4000 Hz) of an innovative output watery (top right).
That
innovative watery is a combination of water ["wORÄ] and oily ["OIli] is illustrated by two examples from the training
data (top and bottom right). The innovative output watery features a clear formant structure of water with a high
front vowel [i], characteristic of the lexical item oily (see marked areas of the spectrograms). At 19244 steps, the
vocalic structure of [i] is not present in the output, given the exact same latent code and random latent space.
The network thus corrects the formant structure from an innovative watery into water as the training
progresses. In some other cases, the network at 19244 steps outputs oily for what was watery at 8011 steps.

suit

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

year

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

water

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

Probability

Steps

0.00

8011

oily

1.00

19244

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

rag

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

else

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

c1
c2
c3
c4
c5

c

Figure 4:
Estimates of two multinomial logistic regression models (for 5-word models trained after 8011 and 19244
steps) with coded transcribed outputs as the dependent variable and the latent code with ﬁve levels that correspond
to the ﬁve unique one-hot vectors in the model.

that correspond to the ﬁve unique one-hot values in the latent code. The diﬀerence in AIC between
the model with the latent code as a predictor (AIC = 674.7) vs. the empty model (AIC = 1707.1)
suggests that the latent code is indeed a signiﬁcant predictor of the lexical item in the output.
Counts are given in Table 2. Estimates from the multinomial logistic model in Figure 4 clearly
show that each lexical item is associated with a unique latent code.

3.1.2. 19244 steps
The proposed model of lexical learning allows not only for the ability to test learning of lexical
items, but also to probe learning representations as training progresses.
We propose that the
progress of lexical learning can be directly observed by keeping the random variables constant
across training steps. In other words, we train the Generator at various training steps and generate
outputs for models trained after diﬀerent number of steps with the same latent code (c) and the

if involving “water”, “oil”, and “rag”, then water, oily, rag, respectively. In all other cases, the output was coded as
else.

same latent variables (z). This reveals how encoding of lexical items with unique latent codes
changes with training.
To probe lexical learning as training progresses, we train the 5-word model at 8011 steps for
an additional 11233 steps (total 19244) and generate outputs.
The generation is performed as
described in Section 3.1.1: for each unique latent code (one-hot vector), we generate 100 outputs
with latent variables identical to the ones used on the model trained after 8011 steps. The latent
code is again manipulated to value 2 (e.g. [2, 0, 0, 0, 0]) in order to probe the underlying eﬀects of
the latent code on generated outputs.
The latent code remains a signiﬁcant predictor in a multinomial logistic regression model (AIC
= 759.9 for a model with the predictor and 1760.2 for an empty model). In fact, success rates
remain almost identical across the training steps as is clear from regression estimates in Figure 4
with one notable exception. The most substantial improvement in success rate is observed for oily:
+11% in raw counts. The overall success rate is lowest in the 8011-step model precisely for lexical
item oily. In fact, the success rate for [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] with assumed lexical representation oily is only
26%. At 19244 steps, the success rate (given the exact same latent variables) increases to 37%.12

Generating data with identical latent variables allows us to observe how the network transforms
an output that violates the underlying lexical representation to an output that conforms to it.
Figure 5 illustrates how an output water at 8011 steps for latent code [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] changes to oily
at 19244 steps.13 Both outputs have the same latent code and latent variables (z). Spectrograms
in Figure 5 clearly show how the formant structure of water and its characteristic period of reduced
amplitude for a ﬂap [R] change to a formant structure characteristic for oily with a consonantal
period that corresponds to [l]. The ﬁgure also features spectrograms of two training data points,
water and oily, which illustrate a degree of acoustic similarity between the two lexical items.
Similarly, Figure 3 illustrates how an output watery that violates the training data in a linguistically
interpretable manner at 8011 steps changes to water consistent with the training data.
In sum, the results of the ﬁrst model suggest that the Generator in the ciwGAN architecture
trained on 5 lexical items learns to generate innovative data such that each unique latent code
corresponds to a lexical item. In other words, the network encodes unique lexical information in its
acoustic outputs based solely on its training objective: to generate data such that unique code is
retrievable from its outputs. Figure 4 illustrates that each lexical item is associated with a unique
code. Modeling of lexical learning is thus fully generative: when the latent code is manipulated
outside of the training range to value 2, the network mostly outputs one lexical item per unique
code with success rates from approximately 98% to 26%. The errors are not randomly distributed:
the pattern of errors as well as innovative outputs suggest that (i) suit and year and (ii) water and
oily are the items that the Generator associates more closely together. Output errors fall almost
exclusively within these groups. The Generator also outputs innovative data that violate training
data distributions. Acoustic analysis of the training data reveals motivations for the innovative
outputs. When we follow learning across diﬀerent training steps, we observe the Generator’s repair
of innovative outputs or outputs that deviate from the expected values. The highest improvement
is observed in the lexical item with overall highest error rate.

3.2. ciwGAN on 10 lexical items

To evaluate how the Generator performs on a higher number of lexical classes, another model
was trained on 10 content lexical items from the TIMIT database, each of which is attested at least

12The model does not seem to improve further after 46002 steps.
13Occasionally, a change in the opposite direction is also present.

water
oily
[0, 0, 0, 2, 0]

4000

4000

2
2

3

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

3

1
1

Time (s)
97.27
97.7
0

Time (s)
97.27
97.7
0

8011
19244
Training steps

Comparison with TIMIT
water
oily

4000

4000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
0.3042
0

Time (s)
21.82
22.12
0

Figure 5:
Waveforms and spectrograms (0-4000 Hz) of a generated output at 8011 steps (trained on ﬁve lexical
items) for latent code [0, 0, 0, 2, 0] that can be transcribed as water (top left); and of a generated output for the
exact same latent code as well as other 95 latent variables, but generated by a model trained after 19244 steps (top
right) transcribed as oily. Circled areas point to three major changes on the spectrogram that occur from the output
at 8011 steps to the output at 19244 steps: vocalic formants change from [wO] to [oI] (area 1), periods characteristic
of a ﬂap [R] change to [l] (area 2) and formant structure for [Ä] turns into an [i] (area 3). Examples for water and oily
from the TIMIT database (bottom left and right) illustrate close similarity of the generated outputs to the training
data. While the opposite change (from oily to water) also occurs, it appears less common.

word
IPA
data points
ask
["æsk]
633
carry
["khæôi]
632
dark
["dAôk]
644
greasy
["gôisi]
630
like
["laIk]
697
oily
["OIli]
638
rag
["ôæg]
638
suit
["sut]
630
water
["wORÄ]
649
year
["jIô]
650
Total
6441

Table 3: Ten content lexical items from the TIMIT database used for training in the ciwGAN model (Section 3.2)
with their corresponding IPA transcription (based on general American English) and counts of data points for each
item.

600 times in the database. All 10 lexical items with exact counts and IPA transcriptions are listed
in Table 3.
To evaluate lexical learning in a generative fashion, we use the same technique as on the 5-item
Generator in Section 3.1. The Generator is trained for 27103 steps (∼1346 epochs). The number of
epochs is thus approximately at the halfway point between the models in Sections 3.1.1 (8011) and
3.1.2 (19244). We generate 100 outputs for each unique one-hot vector with the value set outside of
the training range to 2 (e.g. [2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]), while keeping the uniform latent variables
(z) constant across the 10 groups. 1000 outputs were thus annotated.
Similarly to the 5-word model in Section 3.1.1, the generated data suggests that the Generator
learns to associate each lexical item with a unique representation. To test the signiﬁcance of the
latent code as a predictor, the coded annotated data were ﬁt to a multinomial logistic regression
model (as described in Section 3.1).14 The AIC test suggests that the latent code is a signiﬁcant
predictor (AIC = 4555.6 for an empty model vs. 1909.4 for a model with the predictor).
Estimates from the multinomial logistic regression model in Figure 6 illustrate that each unique
one-hot vector is associated with a unique lexical item. Each lexical item has a single substantial
peak in estimates per latent code. The only exception appears to be rag without a clear repre-
sentation. The highest proportion of rag appears for c1 = 2 at approximately 20%. However,
this particular latent code (c1 = 2) already outputs a substantially higher proportion of dark. It
thus appears that the Generator fails to generate outputs such that the diﬀerence between the two
outputs would be substantial. There is a high degree of phonetic similarity precisely between these
two lexical items: the vowels [æ] and [A] are acoustically similar and both lexical items contain a
rhotic [ô] and a voiced stop. Success rates for the other nine lexical items range from 39%–99% in
raw counts (for all raw counts, see the Appendix).
To illustrate that the network learns to associate lexical items with unique values in the latent
code (one-hot vector), we generate outputs by manipulating the one-hot vector for each value and
by keeping the rest of the latent space (z) constant. Such a manipulation can result in gener-
ated samples, where each latent space outputs a distinct lexical item associated with that value

14The outputs were coded according to the following criteria: if transcription included “su[ie][td]”, then suit, if
“[ˆs]e[ae]r” then year, if “water” then water, if “dar” then dark, if “greas” then greasy, if “[kc].*r” then carry, if
“[ao][wia]ly” then oily, if “rag” then rag, if “as” then ask, if “li” then like.

dark

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

water

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

oily

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

year

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

greasy

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

like

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

Probability

carry

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

ask

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

rag

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

suit

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

else

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
c8
c9
c10

c

Figure 6: Estimates of a multinomial logistic regression model with coded transcribed outputs as the dependent
variable and the latent code with ten levels that correspond to the ten unique one-hot vectors in the model trained
on ten lexical items from TIMIT after 27103 steps.

[2000000000] [0200000000] [0020000000] [0002000000] [0000200000] [0000020000] [0000002000] [0000000200] [0000000020] [0000000002]

dark
water
oily
year
greasy
like
carry
ask
X
suit

Time (s)
0
4.162

Figure 7: Waveforms and spectrograms (0-8000 Hz) of generated outputs (of a model trained on 10 items after 27103
steps) when only the latent code is manipulated and the remaining 90 latent random variables are kept constant
across all 10 outputs.
Transcriptions (by the author) suggest that each lexical item is associated with a unique
representation.

([20000000000] outputs dark, [02000000000] water, etc.).15 Note that the acoustic contents of the
generated outputs that correspond to each lexical item are substantially diﬀerent (as illustrated by
the spectrograms in Figure 7), which means that the latent code (c) needs to be strongly associ-
ated with the individual lexical items, given that all the other 90 variables in the latent space (the
z-variables which constitute 90% of all latent space) are kept constant and that the entire change
of the output occurs only due to change of the latent code c. In other words, by only changing the
latent code and setting the variables to desired values while keeping the rest of the latent space
constant, we can generate desired lexical items with the Generator network.

3.3. ﬁwGAN on 8 lexical items

To evaluate lexical learning in a ﬁwGAN architecture, we train the ﬁwGAN model with three
featural variables (φ). Because the latent code in ﬁwGAN is binomially distributed, three featural
variables correspond to 23 = 8 categories. The model was trained on 8 content lexical items with
more than 600 attestations in the TIMIT database (listed in Table 4). The model used for the
analysis was trained after 20026 steps which correspond to a similar number of epochs as the 10-
word ciwGAN model in Section 3.2 (∼1241 epochs). Like for the ciwGAN models (Sections 3.1
and 3.2), we generate 100 outputs for each unique binary code given the 3 featural variables with
the values of the features set outside of the training range to 2 instead of 1: [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 2], [0,
2, 0], [0, 2, 2], [2, 0, 0], etc.
As expected, learning in the ﬁwGAN architecture is more challenging compared to ciwGAN.
The network has only log2(n) variables to encode n lexical items (compared to n variables for n
classes in ciwGAN). Despite the latent space for lexical learning being highly reduced, an analysis
of generated data in the ﬁwGAN architecture suggests that the Generator learns to associate each
binary code with a distinct lexical item (for an additional test, see Section 3.3.2).
To test signiﬁcance of the featural code (φ) as a predictor, the annotated data were ﬁt to a
multinomial logistic regression model as in Section 3.1 and 3.2. The dependent variables are again

15Often each series outputs one or two divergences from the ideal output.

word
IPA
data points
ask
["æsk]
633
carry
["khæôi]
632
dark
["dAôk]
644
greasy
["gôisi]
630
like
["laIk]
697
suit
["sut]
630
water
["wORÄ]
649
year
["jIô]
650
Total
5165

Table 4: Eight content lexical items from the TIMIT database used for training in the ﬁwGAN architecture (Section
3.3) with their corresponding IPA transcription (based on general American English) and counts of data points for
each item.

coded transcriptions16 and the independent variable is the featural code (φ) with the eight unique
levels as predictors: each for unique binary code. The diﬀerence in AIC between the model that
includes the unique featural codes as predictors (φ) and the empty model (2038.5 vs. 3409.7) suggest
that featural values are signiﬁcant predictors.
Estimates of the regression model in Figure 8 illustrate that most lexical items receive a unique
featural representation. Six out of eight lexical items (dark, ask, suit, greasy, year and carry)
all have distinct latent featural representations that can be associated with these lexical items.
Success rates for the six items have a mean of 50.8% (in raw counts) with the range of 46% to 61%.
Crucially, there appears to be a single peak in regression estimates per lexical item for these six
words, although the peaks are less prominent compared to the ciwGAN architecture (expectedly
so, since learning is signiﬁcantly more challenging in the featural condition). Water and like are
more problematic: [0, 2, 0] outputs like and water at approximately the same rate. It is possible
that learning of the two lexical items is unsuccessful. Another possibility is that [0, 2, 0] is the
underlying representation of water because it is water’s most frequent code that is not already
taken by another lexical item. According to the guidelines in Section 3.1, like would have to be
represented by [0, 0, 0], because it outputs the highest proportion of like that is not already taken
for another lexical items. That this assignment of underlying values of each featural representation
is valid is additionally suggested by another test in Section 3.3.2.
In the ﬁwGAN architecture, we can also test signiﬁcance of each of the three unique features
(φ1, φ2, and φ3). The annotated data were ﬁt to the same multinomial logistic regression model
as above, but with three independent variables: the three features each with two levels (0 and 2).
AIC is lowest when all three variables are present in the model (2135.5) compared to when φ1, φ2,
or φ3 are removed from the model (2527.2, 2413.0, and 2773.3, respectively).

3.3.1. Featural learning
An advantage of the ﬁwGAN architecture is that it can model classiﬁcation (i.e. lexical learn-
ing) and featural learning of phonetic and phonological representations simultaneously. We can
assume that lexical learning is represented by the unique binary code for each lexical item. Pho-
netic and phonological information can be simultaneously encoded with each unique feature (φ).
That phonetic and phonological information is learned with binary features has been the prevalent

16The outputs are coded as described in fn. 14 for the 10-word ciwGAN model, except that if “[ae].*[sf]”, then ask,
because outputs contain a large proportion of s-like frication noise that can also be transcribed with f.

like

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

carry

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

water

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

year

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

greasy

1.00

Probability

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

suit

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

ask

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

dark

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

else

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

000
002
020
022
200
202
220
222

φ

Figure 8: Estimates of a multinomial logistic regression model with coded transcribed outputs as the dependent
variable and the latent code with eight levels that correspond to the eight unique binary codes in the model trained
on eight lexical items from TIMIT after 20026 steps.

assumption in linguistics for decades (Clements, 1985; Hayes, 2009). Recently, neuroimaging evi-
dence suggesting that phonetic and phonological information is stored as signals that approximate
phonological features has been presented in Mesgarani et al. (2014).
An analysis of featural learning in ﬁwGAN — how featural codes simultaneously represent
unique lexical items and phonetic/phonological representations, can be performed by using logis-
tic regression as proposed in the following paragraphs as well as with a number of exploratory
techniques described in this section.
Three out of eight lexical items used in training of the ﬁwGAN model include the segment [s]:
a voiceless alveolar fricative with a distinct phonetic marker — a period of frication noise. The
assumed binary codes for the three items containing [s], ask, greasy, and suit are [2, 2, 0], [2, 0, 0],
and [2, 0, 2] (see Figure 8). We observe that value 2 for feature φ1 is common to all three of the
lexical items containing an [s].
To test the eﬀects of φ1 on presence of [s] in the output, 800 annotated outputs (100 for each
of the eight unique binary codes) were ﬁt to a logistic regression model. The dependent variable is
presence of a s-like frication noise: if a transcribed output contains an s, z, or f, the output is coded
as success. The independent predictors in the model are the three features without interactions:
φ1, φ2, and φ3, each with two levels (0 and 2). Figure 10 features estimates of the regression model.
While all three features are signiﬁcant predictors, the eﬀect appears to be most prominent for φ1.
It is possible that the Generator network in the ﬁwGAN architecture uses feature φ1 to encode
presence of segment [s] in the output. This distribution can also be due to chance. Further work is
needed to test whether presence of phonetic/phonological elements in the output can be encoded
with individual features. Two facts from the generated data, however, suggest that the Generator
in the ﬁwGAN architecture associates φ1 with presence of [s].
First, while ask, greasy, and suit all have φ1 = 2 in common, the fourth unique featural code
with φ1 = 2 ([2, 2, 2]) is associated with dark. Spectral analysis of lexical item dark in the training
data reveals that aspiration of [k] in dark is in the training data from TIMIT frequently realized
precisely as an alveolar fricative [s] (likely due to contextual inﬂuences).17
Approximately 27%
data points for dark in the training data from TIMIT contain a [s]-like frication noise during the
aspiration period of [k].18
Figure 9 gives two such examples from TIMIT of dark with a clear
frication noise characteristic of an [s] sound after the aspiration noise of [k].
In other words,
3 lexical items in the training data contain an [s] as part of their phonemic representation and
therefore feature it consistently. The Generator outputs data such that a single feature (φ1 = 2)
is common to all three items. An additional item often involves a s-like element and the network
uses the same value (φ1 = 2) for its unique code ([2, 2, 2]). There is approximately a 8.6% chance
this distribution is random (of 70 possible featural code assignment for eight items, four of which
contain some phonetic feature such as [s], six or 8.6% combinations contain the same value in one
feature).
As already mentioned, the network outputs mostly dark for the featural code [2, 2, 2], but
a substantial portion of outputs also deviate from dark.
A closer look at the structure of the
innovative outputs for the [2, 2, 2] code reveals that a substantial proportion of them (35) contain
an [s]. As a comparison, other unique codes with φ1 set at the opposite value 0 ([0, 0, 0], [0, 0, 2],
[0, 2, 0], [0, 2, 2]) output 43, 41, 1, and 0 outputs containing an s, z, or f. In other words, for two
unique codes given φ1 = 0, the network generates 0 or 1 output containing an s-like segment. For

17In many TIMIT sentences, dark appears before suit which causes the aspiration of [k] to be inﬂuenced by the
following [s].
18This estimate is based on acoustic analysis of the ﬁrst 100 training data points from the TIMIT database.

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
0.3875
0

Time (s)
0
0.3625
0

Figure 9: Waveforms and spectrograms (0-8000 Hz) of two lexical items dark from TIMIT with a clear s-like frication
noise during the aspiration after the closure of [k] (highlighted).

φ1
φ2
φ3

Probability of containing [s]

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0
2
0
2
0
2

Value of φ

Figure 10: Fitted values with 95% CIs of a logistic regression model with presence of [s]-like frication in the transcribed
outputs as the dependent variable and the three features φ1, φ2, and φ3 as predictors.

the two other codes, the network generates outputs with a similar rate of s-containing sequences
as [2, 2, 2] (dark). However, the motivation for an s-containing output in [0, 2, 2] is clear: year is
in three training data points actually realized as [SIô] (shear). The [0, 0, 0] does not have a distinct
underlying lexical item, so the high proportion of outputs with [s] is not unexpected.
The second piece of evidence suggesting that (φ1 = 2) represents presence of [s] in the output are
innovative outputs that violate the training data distribution. The majority of s-containing outputs
when φ1 = 0 are non-innovative sequences that correspond to lexical items from the training data.
The most notable feature of the s-containing outputs for [2, 2, 2] (dark), on the other hand, is their
innovative nature. Sometimes, these outputs can indeed be transcribed as suit, but in some cases
the Generator outputs an innovative sequence that violates training data but is still linguistically
interpretable. In fact, some of the outputs with [2, 2, 2] are directly interpretable as adding an [s] to
the underlying form dark. Two innovative sequences that can be reliably transcribed as start ["stAôt]
are given in Figure 11 and additional two transcribed as sart ["sAôt] in Figure 12. The network is
never trained on a [st] sequence, let alone on the lexical item start, yet the innovative output is
linguistically interpretable and remarkably similar to the [st] sequence in human outputs that the
network never “sees”. Spectral analysis illustrates a clear period of frication noise characteristic of
[s] followed by a period of silence and release burst characteristic of a stop [t]. Figure 11 provides two
examples from the TIMIT database with the [st] sequence that was never part of the training data,
yet illustrates how acoustically similar the innovative generated outputs in the ﬁwGAN architecture
are to real speech data. This example constitutes one of the prime cases of high productivity of
deep neural networks (for a recent survey on productivity in deep learning, see Baroni 2020).

3.3.2. Underlying representations
Beguˇs (2020a) argues that the underlying value of a feature can be uncovered by manipulating
a given feature well beyond the training range. For example, Beguˇs (2020a) proposes a technique
for identifying variables that correspond to phonetic/phonological properties in the outputs. By
setting the values of the identiﬁed features well beyond the training range, the network almost
exclusively outputs the desired property (e.g. a segment [s] in the output).
This eﬀect of the underlying value of a variable is even more prominent in the ﬁwGAN architec-
ture. When the values of latent features (φ) are set at 0 and 2, success rates appear at approximately
50% (Figure 8). Value 2 was chosen for analysis in Section 3.3, because non-categorical outcomes
yield more insights into learning. However, we can reach almost categorical accuracy when the
values are set substantially higher than 2. For example, when we generate outputs with values
of featural code set at 5 ([5, 5, 5]), the network generates 93/100 outputs19 that can be reliably
transcribed as dark and another 7 that closely resemble dark, but have a period of frication instead
of the initial stop (sark). With even higher values such as 15, the Generator outputs 100/100
samples transcribed as dark for [15, 15, 15]. Similarly, [5, 5, 0] yields ask in 97/100 cases; it yields
an innovative output with ﬁnal [i] in three cases. At [15, 15, 0], the Generator outputs 100/100
ask. The success rates diﬀer across featural codes, but value 15 triggers almost categorical outputs
for most of them. [15, 0, 0] yields 93/100 greasy (1 unclear and 6 ask). For [15, 0, 15], the network
outputs a [sVt] sequence for suit (where V=vowel) 87/100 times. In 13 examples, the frication noise
does not have a pronounced s-like frication noise, but is more distributed and closer to aspiration
noise of [k]. The identity of the vowel is intriguing: the formant values are not characteristic of [u]
(as in suit), but rather of a lower more central vowel (F1 = 663 Hz, F2 = 1618 Hz, F3 = 2515 Hz
for one listing). Since formant variability is high in the training data, the underlying prototypical

19Counts in this sections are performed by the author only.

Generated data (ﬁwGAN)
Corresponding examples
from TIMIT, absent from training

[2, 2, 2]

[stAôt]

[stEIt]

s
t
ɑɹ
t

s
t
ɛɪ
t

Time (s)
59.38
59.68

Time (s)
0
0.2794

[stAôt]

[stAôt]

s
t
ɑɹ
t

s
t
ɑɹ
t

Time (s)
58.35
58.64

Time (s)
0
0.385

Figure 11: (left) Waveforms and spectrograms (0-8000 Hz) of two innovative outputs for φ = [2, 2, 2] transcribed as
["stAôt]. The ﬁwGAN network trained after 20026 steps thus outputs innovative sequence [st] that is absent from
the training data, but is a linguistically interpretable output that can be interpreted as adding [s] to dark. (right)
Waveforms and spectrograms (0-8000 Hz) of two lexical items from TIMIT that are not part of training data, but
illustrate that the innovative [st] sequence in the generated data is acoustically very similar to the [st] sequence in
human outputs that the network has no access to.

s
ɑɹ
t

s
ɑɹ
t

Time (s)
5.112
5.413

Time (s)
94.2
94.5

Figure 12: Waveforms and spectrograms (0-8000 Hz) of two innovative outputs for φ = [2, 2, 2] transcribed as ["sAôt].

representation likely defaults to a more central vowel.
[0, 0, 15] yields carry in 100/100 outputs, but in 13 of these outputs the aspiration noise of [k] is
distributed with a peak in higher frequencies for an acoustic eﬀect of [ts]. [0, 15, 0] yields 100/100
water.
The acoustic output is reduced to include only the main acoustic properties of water:
formant structure for [wO] followed by a consonantal period for [R] and a very brief (sometimes
missing) vocalic period (Figure 13).
The only two codes that do not yield straightforward underlying representations are [0, 0, 0]
and [0, 2, 2]. It appears that the Generator is unable to strongly associate [0, 0, 0] with any lexical
representation, likely due to lack of positive values in this particular code. This means that the
network needs to learn underlying representations for two remaining lexical items with a single
code: like and year, both likely associated with [0, 2, 2]. When set to [0, 5, 5], the Generator
outputs both like and year,20 but at [0, 10, 10] and [0, 15, 15] the underlying representation is
an acoustic output that is diﬃcult to characterize and is likely a blend of the two representations
(acoustically closer to like; see Figure 13). Future analyses should thus include log2(n) variables
for n −1 classes in the ﬁwGAN architecture.
Another interesting fact emerges when we set the featural codes to high values such as 5 or 15.
The outputs at these high values are minimally variable: the outputs are almost identical despite
the 97 random latent variables z being randomly sampled for each output, as illustrated by Figure
13.
It appears that the network associates unique featural codes with prototypical underlying
representations of lexical items. When values are lower, other random latent variables (z) cause
variation in the outputs, but the high values (such as 5 or 15) of the featural codes φ override this
variation and reveal the underlying lexical representation for each featural code.
The generative test with values set well above the training range strongly suggests that the
Generator associates lexical items with unique codes and likely represents them with prototypical
acoustic values. The test also conﬁrms that the assumed underlying lexical items identiﬁed with
multinomial logistic regression (Figure 8) are correct.

20Occasionally, [0, 5, 5] also yields an output that can be characterized as water.

dark_15_15_15
ask_15_15_0

water_0_15_0

like_year_0_15_15

Frequency (0-8000 Hz)

t
t

t

t

sVt_15_0_15
greasy_15_0_0
carry_0_0_15

Frequency (0-8000 Hz)

t
t
t

Figure 13: Waveforms of the ﬁrst ﬁve generated outputs for each featural code when values are set at 15.
The
waveforms clearly show that the outputs feature minimal variability. Below each waveform is a spectrogram (0–8000
Hz) of the ﬁrst output (the topmost waveform). All seven outputs have the exact same values for 97 random latent
variables (z); they only diﬀer in the three featural codes φ.

3.4. ﬁwGAN on the entire TIMIT
To test how the proposed architecture scales to substantially larger training datasets, we train
the ﬁwGAN architecture on the entire TIMIT database. TIMIT was sliced for words into the same
format as described in Section 3.1.1, which yields 54,378 lexical items in the training data. Because
TIMIT contains approximately 6,229 unique lexical items, we train the ﬁwGAN network with 13
code variables, which allows for 213 = 8, 192 unique classes. The number of possible classes is
higher than the number of unique items (by about 1,963 or 24.0%). This experiment thus also tests
whether lexical learning emerges in a model in which the number of classes diﬀers from the number
of lexical items. The network was trained for 179,528 steps (∼1056 epochs).21

Training the networks to learn lexical items from the entire TIMIT is a challenging task. First,
neither the Generator (tested here for lexical learning) nor the Q-network (forcing the Generator
to output informative data) have direct access to the data. The only network that actually has a
direct access to the training data is the Discriminator, which is the least relevant network in the
architecture for learning lexical information. This stands in stark contrast with the autoencoder
architecture, in which the network that learns lexical representations in its latent space has a direct
access to the data. Second, TIMIT is highly variable and contains lexical items that are phonetically
highly reduced. Many items contain only one token per item, and in general, the token distribution
of the lexical items varies substantially. The dimension of the vector representing lexical items
in our models is highly reduced: only 13 binary code variables (13% of the latent variables) are
available to the model to encode identity of 6,229 unique items with 54,378 total tokens.
Based on inferential statistical tests in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, we argued that the models
show clear evidence for lexical learning. In a model with fewer codes, we can ﬁt all annotations
to a multinomial logistic regression model and perform hypothesis testing for lexical learning. In
a larger model with the entire TIMIT as the training data, it is challenging to manually analyze
outputs of all 8,192 binary codes given the thirteen latent features (φ) in the model. Instead, we use
the argument from the models with fewer variables and test lexical learning by generating data with
a subset of possible latent codes. Evidence for lexical learning is evaluated in the following way: if
the Generator outputs one lexical item more often than other lexical items for each unique code, it
is reasonable to assume (based on the results in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) that the particular lexical
item is the underlying learned representation of the corresponding unique code, as is conﬁrmed by
statistical tests in the models with fewer variables.
Despite the highly challenging learning task and the mismatch between the number of classes
and the number of actual lexical items, the ﬁwGAN does appear to show evidence for lexical learning
even when trained on the entire TIMIT dataset. We choose 70 out of possible 8,192 unique latent
codes and generate sets of outputs, each for one of the 70 chosen codes. We only manipulate the
latent code (φ) across the 70 sets of outputs; all other 87/100 variables z are identical across the
sets of outputs. The values of the latent code are set to 0 or either 1.0 or a slightly higher value
of 1.1 (with no substantial diﬀerences in outputs observed among 1.0 or 1.1). As will be argued
below, the Generator performs well on the lexical learning task even when the latent variables are
not manipulated to marginal levels outside of the training range.22

Based on exploration of the 70 unique latent codes, three types of outcomes are observed: (i)
the Generator outputs predominantly one clearly identiﬁable lexical item for a latent code; (ii)
the Generator outputs predominantly one sequence of sounds for a latent code, but the actual

21The training on an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti takes approximately 160 steps per 300s for a total of ∼4 days
and 12 hours. The models with higher number of steps face mode collapse issues, common in the GAN architecture.
22In fact, the Generator outputs unintelligible outputs when values are manipulated substantially outside of the
training range (which stands in opposition to the models in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3).

underlying lexical item is diﬃcult to establish; and (iii) the Generator outputs unclear and variable
outputs for a latent code.23 The ﬁrst and desired outcome, where the Generator outputs almost
exclusively one lexical item that is easily recognizable per one latent code, is the most frequent.24

For approximately 29 codes (out of 70 tested or 41.4%), the Generator outputs mostly one clearly
recognizable lexical item. Figure 14 shows the ﬁrst ten generated outputs for ﬁfteen out of 29 latent
variables for which a clear underlying lexical item can be established. As already mentioned, the
other latent variables (z) are identical in the ten outputs across the 15 sets. There is relatively little
variation in the outputs: representation of a lexical item appears relatively uniform, as suggested
by the spectrograms.
It appears that the network learns both very frequent words (such as that or is), but also
substantially less frequent words, such as let which appears in 23 tokens or dirty in only 15 tokens
in the training data. A change of a single feature (φ) can result in a substantial change in the
output. For example, a change in φ1 from [0, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0] to [1.1, 1.1,
1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0] results from is to let (with occasional spill-over of is as was also
observed in the previous models). A change in φ2 from [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] to [0,
1.1, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] results in greasy and see. Some words, on the other hand, can
be represented with multiple latent codes and occasionally, the change of one feature (φ) does not
result in a substantial change of the output.
While the networks appear to associate one lexical item per code even when there are more
classes than lexical items (6,229 vs. 8,192), two or more unique codes can be associated with the
same lexical item. There are approximately six such (mostly high frequency) words among the 70
explored unique latent codes: we, the, dirty, that, and let are represented with two binary codes; is
with three codes. If the 70 latent codes are representative, we might expect a relative high number
of the unique codes to be associated with a single lexical item. The proportion of unique codes
actually associated with the same word (for each word associated with multiple codes), however, is
probably substantially less than 2/70 (=234 of the total 8,192) or 3/70 (=350 of the total 8,192 in
case of is) precisely because the codes with which a single lexical item is associated more than once
share many features. From the perspective of spoken term discovery, the multiple association is
less problematic, but further work is needed to mitigate this problem. From a cognitive modeling
perspective, the multiple association is not ideal. There might be two reasons for why this is also
appealing. High frequency items have more variation in spoken language. In this way, the network
can encode the same high frequency item, but with diﬀerent phonetic properties. Second, the codes
with which the network encodes the same item diﬀer only in a single feature or two in ﬁve out of six
cases (is is the only item that diﬀers in up to six features). This allows for a unique representation
of a lexical item in at least a large subset of variables.
Underlying values of the remaining 41 latent codes are not readily identiﬁable based on the
generated outputs, but their outputs are not unstructured either.
There is clear phonological
structure in approximately 27 outputs (out of 70 or 38.6%), but the exact lexical item is diﬃcult to
establish. Often, there is little variation in the output. For example, 8 (80%) out of 10 generated
outputs for a speciﬁc latent code feature a sequence of [s] and [p] and a following vowel ([spV]
where V = vowel), but there is variation in the realization of the vowel and the exact lexical item
cannot be identiﬁed. Similarly, one latent code outputs [ôisV] in 7/10 outputs (especially frequent
is [ôisi]), yet it is diﬃcult to establish which word [ôisV] represents.
There are two reasons for why the outputs in this group are not easily identiﬁable as lexical

23All outputs in the current section were analyzed and annotated by the author.
24In some cases, the underlying lexical item is not the most frequent, but the only one that is identiﬁable.

items. Either the networks do represent unique lexical items with these codes, but the quality of
the audio output is not high enough for a lexical item to be recognizable, or the networks encode
combinations of phonemes with latent codes rather than unique lexical items. In other words, it is
possible that sub-lexical units can be learned by the Generator and used to encode information. In
the remaining 14 cases (20.0%), the network generates an unclear output that is diﬃcult to identify
as a lexical item and the outputs do not show a uniform phonological structure either.
Some evidence for complex sublexical featural learning emerges in the ﬁwGAN trained on the
entire TIMIT too. For example, if φ5−7 are set to 1.1 and φ12 is set to 0, the Generator frequently
outputs a distinct initial velar stop [k] in six out of six selected sets of outputs with this structure
of the latent code.25 [k]-initial words are not reliably identiﬁed at the beginning of the word in any
of the other 64 tested codes. While the items except quite are not clear enough to fall in group (i),
the initial [k] is clearly identiﬁable across the six sets. Apart from the initial [k], the outputs with
this structure diﬀer substantially in their phonetic properties (e.g. outputs can approximate items
such as culture, car(t), quite, color or [kV]). It is reasonable to assume that the network encodes a
sublexical phonetic property — presence of initial [k] — with a subset of latent features.
The results suggest that the Generator at least partially learns to encode lexical items with
unique latent codes in the ﬁwGAN architecture even when trained on 54,378 tokens of 6,229 lexical
items from TIMIT. Based on a subsample of latent codes, the Generator outputs a clearly identiﬁ-
able lexical item in approximately 41.4% of tested codes. In most cases, the one lexical item is the
majority output (as clear from Figure 14) realized with relatively little phonetic variability. There
are many properties of TIMIT data that the Generator could learn to encode into 8,192 classes, but
it does appear that it is precisely lexical items that the network is learning. This experiment also
suggests that the Generator learns to represent lexical items with unique codes even if the number
of possible classes and the number of actual items do not match and even if there is a substantial
diﬀerence in the frequency of individual items.

4. Discussion and future directions

This paper proposes two architectures for unsupervised modeling of lexical learning from raw
acoustic data with deep neural networks. The ability to retrieve information from acoustic data in
human speech is modeled with a Generator network that learns to output data that resemble speech
and, simultaneously, learns to encode unique information in its outputs. We also propose techniques
for probing how deep neural networks trained on speech data learn meaningful representations.
The proposed ﬁwGAN and ciwGAN models are based on the Generative Adversarial Network
architecture and its implementations in WaveGAN (Donahue et al., 2019), DCGAN (Radford et al.,
2015), and InfoGAN (Chen et al., 2016; Rodionov, 2018).
Following Beguˇs (2020a), we model
language acquisition as learning of a dependency between the latent space and generated outputs.
We introduce a network that forces the Generator to output data such that information is retrievable
from its acoustic outputs and propose a new structure of the latent variables that allows featural
learning and a very low-dimension vector representation of lexical items. Lexical learning emerges
in an unsupervised manner from the architecture: the most eﬃcient way for the Generator network
to output acoustic data such that unique information is retrievable from its data is to encode unique
information in its acoustic outputs such that latent codes coincide with lexical items in the training
data. The result is thus a deep convolutional neural network that takes latent codes and variables
and outputs innovative data that resembles training data distributions as well as learns to associate

25There are more outputs with this structure of features that have not been tested.

[0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]

[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]

[0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0]

8000

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
4.2
0

Time (s)
0
6.8
0

Time (s)
0
3.633
0

sees
see X
see
see
see
sees
see
see
see
see

greasy
X
X
greasy
X
greasy greasy
greas
greasy
X

tea
[Tə]
[Tə]
[Tə]
[Tə]
tea
tea
tea
tea
tea

[1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0]

[1.1, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0]

[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]

8000

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
3.765
0

Time (s)
0
5.278
0

Time (s)
0
2.911
0

dad
X
dad
dad
dad
X
dad
X
dad
dad

quite
quietly
quite
quite
quite
quite
quite
quite
quite
quite

an
an
an
an
an
an
an
an
an
an

[0, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0]

[1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0]

[0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]

8000

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
3.057
0

Time (s)
0
2.366
0

Time (s)
0
3.828
0

is
X
is
is
is
this
is
this
is
is

is
let
let
let
let
is
i
is
i
x

year
year
year
X
X
year
year
year
year
year

[0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0]

[0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1]

[0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]

8000

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
3.031
0

Time (s)
0
4.339
0

Time (s)
0
6.033
0

thirty
X
X
X
X
thirty
thirty
thirty
thirty
third

she
X
she
she
she
she
she
she X
she
she

gassy
X
dirty
dirty
dirty
gassy
dirty
gassy
dirty
dirty

[1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 0]

[1.1, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1.1, 0]

[0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 1.1, 1.1, 0, 0, 1.1, 0, 1.1, 0]

8000

8000

8000

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Frequency (Hz)

Time (s)
0
4.004
0

Time (s)
0
1.917
0

Time (s)
0
3.424
0

this
that
that
that
that
this
that
this
that
that

need
[Ti]
[Ti]
[Ti]
[Ti]
need
need
need
need
need

X[i]
year
near
year
year
X[i]
near
X[i]
near
near

Figure 14: Waveforms and spectrograms of ﬁfteen sets of outputs, each for one unique latent code value. Each set
contains ten outputs in which the other 87 latent variables z are held constant across the ﬁfteen sets. The Generator
only outputs waveforms; spectrograms are given for the purpose of acoustic analysis.

lexical items with unique representations.
Four experiments tested lexical learning in ciwGAN and ﬁwGAN architectures trained on tokens
of ﬁve, ten, eight, and 6,229 sliced lexical items in raw audio format from a highly variable database
— TIMIT. The paper proposes that in smaller models lexical learning can be evaluated with
multinomial logistic regression on generated data. Evidence of lexical learning is present in all four
experiments. It appears that the Generator learns to associate lexical items with unique latent code
— categorical (as in ciwGAN) or featural (as in ﬁwGAN). By manipulating the values of latent
codes to value 2, the networks output unique lexical items for each unique code and reach accuracy
that ranges from 98% to 26% in the ﬁve-word model. To replicate the results and test learning on
a higher number of lexical items, the paper presents evidence that the model learns to associate
unique latent codes with lexical items in the 10-words model as well, with only one exception.
When trained on the entire TIMIT, the Generator outputs one clearly identiﬁable lexical item in
approximately 41% of latent codes tested. The paper also proposes a technique for following how
the network learns representations as training progresses. We can directly observe how the network
transforms an output that violates training data into an output that conforms to it by keeping the
latent space constant as training progresses.
The ﬁwGAN architecture features, to our knowledge, a new proposal within the InfoGAN
architecture: to model classiﬁcation with featural codes instead of one-hot vectors. This shift yields
the potential to model featural learning and higher-level classiﬁcation (i.e. phonetic/phonological
features and unique lexical representations) simultaneously. The paper presents evidence suggesting
that the network might use some feature values to encode phonetic/phonological properties such
as presence of [s].
Regression models suggest that φ1 is associated with presence of [s] in the
output (and simple probabilistic calculation reveals about 8.6% probability that the distribution is
due to chance). The strongest evidence for simultaneous lexical and featural learning comes from
innovative outputs in the ﬁwGAN architecture. The network trained on lexical items that lack
a sequence of a fricative and a stop [st] altogether outputs an innovative sequence start or sart.
These innovative outputs can be analyzed as adding a segment [s] (from suit) to dark, likely under
the inﬂuence of the fact that φ1 represents presence of [s].
Innovative outputs that violate training data are informative for both computational models of
language acquisition as well as for our understanding of what types of dependencies the networks
are able to learn. We discuss several cases of innovative outputs. Some innovations are motivated
by training data distributions (e.g. sear) and reveal how the networks treat acoustically similar
lexical items. For other innovative outputs, such as watery, the training data contains no apparent
motivations. We also track changes from innovative to conforming outputs as training progresses.
We argue that innovative outputs are linguistically interpretable and acoustically very similar to
actual speech data that is absent from the training data. For example, an innovative [st] sequence
in start corresponds directly to human outputs with this sequence that were never part of the
training data. Further comparisons of this type should yield a better understanding on how the
combinatorial principle in human language can arise without language-speciﬁc parameters in a
model.
The paper also discusses how internal representations in deep convolutional networks can be
identiﬁed and explored. We argue that by setting the latent values substantially beyond the training
range (as suggested for phonological learning in Beguˇs 2020a), the Generator almost exclusively
outputs one unique lexical item per each unique featural code (with only one exception) in the
ﬁwGAN architecture on eight lexical items. In other words, for very high values of the featural
code (φ), lexical learning appears to be near categorical. The variability of the outputs is minimal
at such high values (e.g. 15). It appears that setting the featural code to such extreme values reveals
the underlying representation of each featural code. This property is highly desirable in a model of

language acquisition and has the potential to reveal the underlying learned representations in the
GAN architecture.
Several further experiments and improvements to the model are left to future work. The pro-
posed architecture allows testing of any property of the data and probing the learned representation
behind each latent code (or variable; as per Beguˇs 2020a). For example, we can train the network
on n latent codes or features, which eﬀectively means we are forcing the network to learn n (or
2n) most informative categories in the data.
Manipulating the latent codes to marginal levels
represents a technique to test which properties about the data the network learns in a generative
fashion. We can thus test how deep convolutional networks learn informative properties about
the data and directly observe what those categories are. Representation of any process in speech
can thus be modeled (for an identity-based pattern, see Beguˇs 2020b). Second, the current paper
only analyzes the Generator network in the generative fashion, but the architecture also allows an
analysis of the Q-network in discriminative lexical learning tasks (such as ABX). An experiment
with novel unobserved test data fed to the Q-network would reveal the model’s ability to assign
unique codes to individual lexical items. Such a network would be highly desirable in an unsu-
pervised lexical learning setting or for very low dimension acoustic word embedding tasks. Third,
the paper proposes a technique to follow lexical learning as training progresses (see Section 3.1).
A superﬁcial comparison between lexical learning in the proposed models and language-acquiring
children could yield further insights into the computational modeling of language acquisition (for
an overview of the literature on how lexical learning progresses in language acquisition, see Gaskell
and Ellis 2009). The proposed architecture can also be used for testing lexical learning when trained
on adult-directed vs. child-directed speech corpora. Finally, future directions should also include
developing a model that could parse lexical items from a continuous acoustic speech stream and
improving the model’s overall performance.
The proposed model of lexical learning has several further implications. Dependencies in speech
data are signiﬁcantly better understood than dependencies in visual data. A long scientiﬁc tra-
dition of studying dependencies in phonetic and phonological data in human languages yields an
opportunity to use linguistic data to probe the types of dependencies deep neural networks can or
cannot learn (Beguˇs, 2020b). The proposed architectures allow us to probe what types of depen-
dencies the networks can learn, how they encode unique information in the latent space, and how
self-organization of retrievable information emerges in the GAN architecture. The models also have
some basic implications for unsupervised text-to-speech generation tasks: manipulating the latent
variables to speciﬁc values results in the Generator outputting desired lexical items.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by a grant to new faculty at the University of Washington and the
University of California, Berkeley. I would like to thank Sameer Arshad for slicing data from the
TIMIT database and Ella Deaton for annotating data.

Declaration of interests
The author declares no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

References

Alishahi, A., Barking, M., Chrupa la, G., Aug. 2017. Encoding of phonology in a recurrent neural
model of grounded speech. In: Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (CoNLL 2017). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver,
Canada, pp. 368–378.
URL

Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., Bottou, L., 06–11 Aug 2017. Wasserstein generative adversarial net-
works. In: Precup, D., Teh, Y. W. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning. Vol. 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, International
Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, pp. 214–223.
URL

Arnold, D., Tomaschek, F., Sering, K., Lopez, F., Baayen, R. H., 04 2017. Words from spontaneous
conversational speech can be recognized with human-like accuracy by an error-driven learning
algorithm that discriminates between meanings straight from smart acoustic features, bypassing
the phoneme as recognition unit. PLOS ONE 12 (4), 1–16.
URL

Baayen, R. H., Chuang, Y.-Y., Shafaei-Bajestan, E., Blevins, J. P., 2019. The discriminative lexicon:
A uniﬁed computational model for the lexicon and lexical processing in comprehension and
production grounded not in (de) composition but in linear discriminative learning. Complexity
2019.

Baevski, A., Schneider, S., Auli, M., 2020. vq-wav2vec: Self-supervised learning of discrete speech
representations. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. pp. 1–12.
URL

Baroni, M., 2020. Linguistic generalization and compositionality in modern artiﬁcial neural net-
works. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 375 (1791),
20190307.
URL

Barry, S. M., Kim, Y. E., 2019. InfoWaveGAN: Informative latent spaces for waveform generation,
poster at the North East Music Information Special Interest Group.
URL

Beguˇs, G., 2020a. Generative adversarial phonology: Modeling unsupervised phonetic and phono-
logical learning with neural networks. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
URL

Beguˇs, G., 2020b. Identity-based patterns in deep convolutional networks: Generative adversarial
phonology and reduplication.
URL

Boersma, P., Weenink, D., 2015. Praat: doing phonetics by computer [computer program]. version
5.4.06. Retrieved 21 February 2015 from

Bond, Z. S., Wilson, H. F., 1980. /s/ plus stop clusters in children’s speech. Phonetica 37 (3),
149–158.
URL

Brownlee, J., 2019. Generative Adversarial Networks with Python: Deep Learning Generative
Models for Image Synthesis and Image Translation. Machine Learning Mastery.

Chen, M., Hain, T., 2020. Unsupervised Acoustic Unit Representation Learning for Voice Conver-
sion Using WaveNet Auto-Encoders. In: Proc. Interspeech 2020. pp. 4866–4870.
URL

Chen, X., Duan, Y., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., Abbeel, P., 2016. Infogan:
Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In:
Lee, D. D., Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V., Guyon, I., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 29. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 2172–2180.
URL
pdf

Chorowski, J., Weiss, R. J., Bengio, S., van den Oord, A., 2019. Unsupervised speech representation
learning using wavenet autoencoders. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing 27 (12), 2041–2053.

Chuang, Y.-Y., Vollmer, M. L., Shafaei-Bajestan, E., Gahl, S., Hendrix, P., Baayen, R. H., 2020.
The processing of pseudoword form and meaning in production and comprehension: A compu-
tational modeling approach using linear discriminative learning. Behavior Research Methods.
URL

Chung, Y.-A., Tang, H., Glass, J., 2020. Vector-Quantized Autoregressive Predictive Coding. In:
Proc. Interspeech 2020. pp. 3760–3764.
URL

Chung, Y.-A., Wu, C.-C., Shen, C.-H., Lee, H.-Y., Lee, L.-S., 2016. Audio word2vec: Unsupervised
learning of audio segment representations using sequence-to-sequence autoencoder. In: Inter-
speech 2016. pp. 765–769.
URL

Clements, G. N., 1985. The geometry of phonological features. Phonology Yearbook 2 (1), 225–252.

Donahue, C., McAuley, J. J., Puckette, M. S., 2019. Adversarial audio synthesis. In: 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9,
2019. OpenReview.net, pp. 1–16.
URL

Dunbar, E., Algayres, R., Karadayi, J., Bernard, M., Benjumea, J., Cao, X.-N., Miskic, L., Dugrain,
C., Ondel, L., Black, A. W., Besacier, L., Sakti, S., Dupoux, E., 2019. The Zero Resource Speech
Challenge 2019: TTS Without T. In: Proc. Interspeech 2019. pp. 1088–1092.
URL

Dunbar, E., Cao, X. N., Benjumea, J., Karadayi, J., Bernard, M., Besacier, L., Anguera, X.,
Dupoux, E., 2017. The zero resource speech challenge 2017. In: 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU). pp. 323–330.

Dunbar, E., Karadayi, J., Bernard, M., Cao, X.-N., Algayres, R., Ondel, L., Besacier, L., Sakti, S.,
Dupoux, E., Oct 2020. The zero resource speech challenge 2020: Discovering discrete subword
and word units. Interspeech 2020.
URL

Eloﬀ, R., Nortje, A., van Niekerk, B., Govender, A., Nortje, L., Pretorius, A., Biljon, E., van der
Westhuizen, E., Staden, L., Kamper, H., 09 2019. Unsupervised acoustic unit discovery for speech
synthesis using discrete latent-variable neural networks. In: Proc. Interspeech 2019. pp. 1103–
1107.

Elsner, M., Goldwater, S., Feldman, N., Wood, F., Oct. 2013. A joint learning model of word seg-
mentation, lexical acquisition, and phonetic variability. In: Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Seattle, Washington, USA, pp. 42–54.
URL

Feldman, N. H., Griﬃths, T. L., Goldwater, S., Morgan, J. L., 2013. A role for the developing
lexicon in phonetic category acquisition. Psychological review 120 (4), 751.

Feldman, N. H., Griﬃths, T. L., Morgan, J. L., 2009. Learning phonetic categories by learning
a lexicon. In: Scott, J., Waugtal, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. pp. 2208–2213.

Garofolo, J. S., Lamel, L., M Fisher, W., Fiscus, J., S. Pallett, D., L. Dahlgren, N., Zue, V., 11
1993. Timit acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium.

Gaskell, M. G., Ellis, A. W., 2009. Word learning and lexical development across the lifespan.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364 (1536), 3607–3615.
URL

Goldwater, S., Griﬃths, T. L., Johnson, M., 2009. A bayesian framework for word segmentation:
Exploring the eﬀects of context. Cognition 112 (1), 21 – 54.
URL

Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A.,
Bengio, Y., 2014. Generative adversarial nets. In: Ghahramani, Z., Welling, M., Cortes, C.,
Lawrence, N. D., Weinberger, K. Q. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
27. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 2672–2680.
URL

Gulrajani, I., Ahmed, F., Arjovsky, M., Dumoulin, V., Courville, A. C., 2017. Improved train-
ing of wasserstein gans. In: Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R.,
Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30.
Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 5767–5777.
URL

Hayes, B., 2009. Introductory Phonology. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA.

Heymann, J., Walter, O., Haeb-Umbach, R., Raj, B., 2013. Unsupervised word segmentation from
noisy input. In: 2013 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding. pp.
458–463.

Hockett, C. F., 1959. Animal ”languages” and human language. Human Biology 31 (1), 32–39.
URL

Hu, Y., Settle, S., Livescu, K., 2020. Multilingual Jointly Trained Acoustic and Written Word
Embeddings. In: Proc. Interspeech 2020. pp. 1052–1056.
URL

Kamper, H., 2019. Truly unsupervised acoustic word embeddings using weak top-down constraints
in encoder-decoder models. In: ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). pp. 6535–6539.

Kamper, H., Jansen, A., Goldwater, S., 2017. A segmental framework for fully-unsupervised large-
vocabulary speech recognition. Computer Speech & Language 46, 154 – 174.
URL

Kamper, H., Jansen, A., King, S., Goldwater, S., 2014. Unsupervised lexical clustering of speech
segments using ﬁxed-dimensional acoustic embeddings. In: 2014 IEEE Spoken Language Tech-
nology Workshop (SLT). pp. 100–105.

Kuhl, P. K., 2019/06/27 2010. Brain mechanisms in early language acquisition. Neuron 67 (5),
713–727.
URL

Lee, C.-y., Glass, J., Jul. 2012. A nonparametric Bayesian approach to acoustic model discovery.
In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, Jeju Island, Korea, pp.
40–49.
URL

Lee, C.-y., O’Donnell, T. J., Glass, J., 2015. Unsupervised lexicon discovery from acoustic input.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 3, 389–403.
URL

Levin, K., Henry, K., Jansen, A., Livescu, K., 2013. Fixed-dimensional acoustic embeddings of
variable-length segments in low-resource settings. In: 2013 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding. pp. 410–415.

Mesgarani, N., Cheung, C., Johnson, K., Chang, E. F., 2014. Phonetic feature encoding in human
superior temporal gyrus. Science 343 (6174), 1006–1010.
URL

Niekerk, B. v., Nortje, L., Kamper, H., Oct 2020. Vector-quantized neural networks for acoustic
unit discovery in the zerospeech 2020 challenge. Interspeech 2020.
URL

Piantadosi, S. T., Fedorenko, E., 04 2017. Inﬁnitely productive language can arise from chance
under communicative pressure. Journal of Language Evolution 2 (2), 141–147.
URL

R Core Team, 2018. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
URL

Radford, A., Metz, L., Chintala, S., 2015. Unsupervised representation learning with deep convo-
lutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434.

R¨as¨anen, O., 2012. Computational modeling of phonetic and lexical learning in early language
acquisition: Existing models and future directions. Speech Communication 54 (9), 975 – 997.
URL

R¨as¨anen, O., Bland´on, M. A. C., 2020. Unsupervised Discovery of Recurring Speech Patterns Using
Probabilistic Adaptive Metrics. In: Proc. Interspeech 2020. pp. 4871–4875.
URL

R¨as¨anen, O., Doyle, G., Frank, M. C., 2015. Unsupervised word discovery from speech using
automatic segmentation into syllable-like units. In: Proc. Interspeech 2015. pp. 3204–3208.
URL

R¨as¨anen, O., Nagamine, T., Mesgarani, N., 08 2016. Analyzing distributional learning of phonemic
categories in unsupervised deep neural networks. CogSci ... Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Cognitive Science Society (U.S.). Conference 2016, 1757–1762.
URL

Rodionov,
S.,
2018.
info-wgan-gp.

master/experiments/concept_learning/gans/info-wgan-gp.

Saﬀran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., Newport, E. L., 1996. Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants.
Science 274 (5294), 1926–1928.
URL

Saﬀran, J. R., Werker, J. F., Werner, L. A., 2007. The Infant’s Auditory World: Hearing, Speech,
and the Beginnings of Language. John Wiley & Sons, Ch. 2, pp. 58–108.
URL

Shafaei-Bajestan, E., Baayen, R. H., 2018. Wide learning for auditory comprehension. In: Proc.
Interspeech 2018. pp. 966–970.
URL

Shain, C., Elsner, M., Jun. 2019. Measuring the perceptual availability of phonological features
during language acquisition using unsupervised binary stochastic autoencoders. In: Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, Minnesota, pp. 69–85.
URL

Venables, W. N., Ripley, B. D., 2002. Modern Applied Statistics with S, 4th Edition. Springer, New
York, iSBN 0-387-95457-0.
URL

else
rag
oily
water
year
suit
c1
17
0
0
0
9
74
c2
13
0
0
0
71
16
c3
10
0
12
78
0
0
c4
15
0
37
48
0
0
c5
6
92
2
0
0
0

Table A.6: Raw counts for outcomes of the ciwGAN model trained on ﬁve items after 19,244 steps (Section 3.1.2).
The outcomes are coded as described in fn. 11.

Appendix A. Raw counts

else
rag
oily
water
year
suit
c1
7
0
0
0
21
72
c2
18
0
0
0
70
12
c3
6
0
10
84
0
0
c4
13
0
26
61
0
0
c5
2
98
0
0
0
0

Table A.5: Raw counts for outcomes of the ciwGAN model trained on ﬁve lexical items after 8,011 steps (Section
3.1.1). The outcomes are coded as described in fn. 11.

else
suit
rag
ask
carry
like
greasy
year
oily
water
dark
c1
29
0
21
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
49
c2
31
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
8
57
0
c3
37
0
0
0
10
1
0
11
39
2
0
c4
20
0
8
0
1
1
0
65
0
0
5
c5
1
0
0
0
0
0
99
0
0
0
0
c6
10
0
0
26
0
64
0
0
0
0
0
c7
20
0
0
0
76
0
0
4
0
0
0
c8
23
0
0
58
0
18
0
0
0
0
1
c9
63
0
1
0
1
2
0
2
7
18
6
c10
8
92
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table A.7: Raw counts for outcomes of the ciwGAN model trained on ten items after 27,103 steps (Section 3.2). The
outcomes are coded as described in fn. 14.

else
dark
ask
suit
greasy
year
water
carry
like
[0, 0, 0]
43
0
15
0
17
3
3
2
17
[0, 0, 2]
18
1
0
23
0
11
0
47
0
[0, 2, 0]
32
0
0
0
0
0
32
0
36
[0, 2, 2]
18
0
0
0
0
50
32
0
0
[2, 0, 0]
20
1
19
0
47
13
0
0
0
[2, 0, 2]
20
7
0
46
0
0
0
27
0
[2, 2, 0]
15
1
61
0
22
0
0
1
0
[2, 2, 2]
25
54
0
19
0
0
0
2
0

Table A.8: Raw counts for outcomes of the ﬁwGAN model trained on eight items after 20,026 steps (Section 3.3).
The outcomes are coded as described in fn. 16.