Graph Convolutional Neural Networks with Node
Transition Probability-based Message Passing and
DropNode Regularization

Tien Huu Doa,b,∗, Duc Minh Nguyena,b, Giannis Bekoulisa,b, Adrian
Munteanua, Nikos Deligiannis
ID a,b

arXiv:2008.12578v2 [cs.LG] 18 Mar 2021

aVrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium
bimec, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: (Tien Huu Do), (Duc Minh
Nguyen), (Giannis Bekoulis), (Adrian

Munteanu), (Nikos Deligiannis
ID )

1

Abstract

Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have received much attention

recently, owing to their capability in handling graph-structured data. Among the

existing GCNNs, many methods can be viewed as instances of a neural message

passing motif; features of nodes are passed around their neighbors, aggregated

and transformed to produce better nodes’ representations. Nevertheless, these

methods seldom use node transition probabilities, a measure that has been found

useful in exploring graphs. Furthermore, when the transition probabilities are

used, their transition direction is often improperly considered in the feature

aggregation step, resulting in an ineﬃcient weighting scheme.
In addition,

although a great number of GCNN models with increasing level of complexity have

been introduced, the GCNNs often suﬀer from over-ﬁtting when being trained

on small graphs. Another issue of the GCNNs is over-smoothing, which tends to

make nodes’ representations indistinguishable. This work presents a new method

to improve the message passing process based on node transition probabilities

by properly considering the transition direction, leading to a better weighting

scheme in nodes’ features aggregation compared to the existing counterpart.

Moreover, we propose a novel regularization method termed DropNode to address

the over-ﬁtting and over-smoothing issues simultaneously. DropNode randomly

discards part of a graph, thus it creates multiple deformed versions of the graph,

leading to data augmentation regularization eﬀect. Additionally, DropNode

lessens the connectivity of the graph, mitigating the eﬀect of over-smoothing in

deep GCNNs. Extensive experiments on eight benchmark datasets for node and

graph classiﬁcation tasks demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed methods

in comparison with the state of the art.

Keywords:
Graph convolutional neural networks, graph classiﬁcation, node

classiﬁcation, geometric deep learning.

2

1. Introduction

In the recent years, we have witnessed an increasing interest in deep learning-

based techniques for solving problems with data living in non-Euclidean domains,

i.e., graphs and manifolds. In order to handle data in such domains, graph neural

networks (GNNs) have been proposed. There are several types of GNNs, however

recently graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) have attracted a great

deal of attention owing to their state-of-the-art performance in a number of tasks

including text (Yao et al., 2019) and image (Quek et al., 2011) classiﬁcation,

semantic segmentation (Qi et al., 2017), question answering (Teney et al., 2017)

and matrix completion (Do et al., 2019). There are two main approaches for

GCNNs, namely, spectral and spatial (Zhou et al., 2018) approaches.
The

former refers to models which deﬁne convolution operators based on graph

Fourier transform (Deﬀerrard et al., 2016; Henaﬀet al., 2015; Bruna et al.,

2013; Ortega et al., 2018). On the other hand, models that follow the latter

approach directly generalize the classical convolution operator to non-Euclidean

domains (i.e., by spatially aggregating information over nodes’ neighborhoods in

the graphs (Hamilton et al., 2017; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017; Niepert et al., 2016;

Gao et al., 2018; Atwood & Towsley, 2016)). The spatial approach has become

more popular lately due to its simplicity, lower computational cost and better

scalability to large graphs.

In general, the operations of most GCNN models can be expressed in two

phases, namely, the (i) Message Passing and (ii) Readout phases. In phase (i),

a node in the graph receives messages from its neighbors, where each message

is computed either from features of a neighboring node or features of an edge

attached to the node. Two steps that are often performed in the message passing

phase are the Aggregate and Update steps (Zhou et al., 2018). In the Aggregate

step, a node gathers messages from its neighbors by performing the weighted

sum operation (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018)

or employing a long short-term memory neural network (LSTM) (Hamilton et al.,

2017). In the Update step, a non-linear transformation is then applied on the

3

aggregated messages to produce the updated node representations. Common

transformations used in the Update step include pre-deﬁned functions, such as

sigmoid and ReLU (Bruna et al., 2013; Deﬀerrard et al., 2016), or learnable

functions, such as gated recurrent units (GRU) (Li et al., 2015) and fully

connected neural networks (Kearnes et al., 2016; Battaglia et al., 2016; Hamilton

et al., 2017; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Zhang et al., 2018).

In GCNN models, the Message Passing phase is often implemented using graph

convolutional layers. By stacking multiple graph convolutional layers, one can

build a deep GCNN model and enable (a) passing messages between nodes that

are more than one hop apart (i.e., nodes connected via other nodes) and (b)

learning abstract intermediate node embeddings through a series of non-linear

transformations. In phase (ii), the learned node embeddings are converted to the

ﬁnal representations for the nodes or for the whole graph. These representation

are then fed to a classiﬁer to produce suitable outputs depending on downstream

tasks.

In GCNN models, the non-Euclidean characteristics of the data are captured

mainly in the Message Passing phase. As such, designing an eﬀective message

passing scheme is of high importance, however it remains a challenging task.

To address this challenge, various message passing formulations have been pro-

posed (Gilmer et al., 2017; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton

et al., 2017). Recently, formulations based on node transition probabilities have

been proven beneﬁcial for multiple graph-based classiﬁcation tasks (Atwood

& Towsley, 2016; Zhang et al., 2018). Nevertheless, such formulations have

not received enough attention from the research community. In addition, other

challenges such as the over-ﬁtting and over-smoothing problems (e.g., especially

when deploying deep GCNNs) often arise. To mitigate over-ﬁtting, popular

regularization methods such as ℓ1, ℓ2 and dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) are

usually employed. Nevertheless, performance gains brought by these methods

generally diminish as GCNNs become deeper (Kipf & Welling, 2016). It is worth

noting that over-ﬁtting is general, i.e., it may happens for diﬀerent types of

neural networks, including GCNNs. On the other hand, over-smoothing (Li

4

et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019) is speciﬁc for deep GCNNs as a result of the

inherent smoothing eﬀect of these models. Speciﬁcally, when many graph con-

volutional layers are stacked together, the obtained representations of nodes in

diﬀerent classes (or clusters) become indistinguishable and inseparable, leading

to degraded performance in downstream tasks such as node classiﬁcation.

In this work, we aim to develop eﬀective GCNN models to handle graph-

structured data by addressing the aforementioned challenges. Firstly, we design

a GCNN message passing scheme employing the transition-based approach.

Speciﬁcally, we observe that the transition directions employed in existing

works (Atwood & Towsley, 2016; Zhang et al., 2018) are sub-optimal since

high weights (i.e., inﬂuence) are assigned to “popular” nodes (i.e., the ones

with multiple connections). Based on this observation, we propose a novel

message passing scheme that eliminates the aforementioned issue by assigning

balanced weights to all the nodes in the graph. We experimentally validate the

eﬀectiveness of the proposed scheme in multiple graph classiﬁcation tasks. In

addition, we introduce a novel method called DropNode to address the over-ﬁtting

and over-smoothing problems on GCNNs. The idea behind this method is that

the underlying structure of the graph is modiﬁed during training by randomly

sub-sampling nodes from the graph. Despite its simplicity, the DropNode method

is highly eﬀective, especially in training deep GCNN models.

To summarize, our contributions in this paper are three-fold:

• We propose a novel neural message passing scheme for GCNNs, which

leverages the node transition probabilities and also takes the “popularity”

of nodes into account;

• We propose DropNode, a simple and eﬀective regularization method which

is applicable to diﬀerent GCNN models;

• We carry out comprehensive experiments on eight real-world benchmark

datasets on both node and graph classiﬁcation tasks to evaluate the pro-

posed models. Experimental results showcase that our models are able to

obtain improved performance over state-of-the-art models.

5

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 reviews

the related work on GCNNs and the commonly-used regularization methods.

Section 3 introduces the notation and problem formulation, while Section 4

describes in detail the proposed method. We present the experimental results of

the proposed models in Section 5 and we conclude our work in Section 6.

2. Related Work

2.1. Neural Message Passing

Most existing GCNN models perform one or multiple message passing steps,

in which nodes’ or edges’ features are aggregated following speciﬁc message

passing schemes (Gilmer et al., 2017). Early works, which follow the spectral

approach, aggregate messages by summing over transformed features of the

nodes where the transformations are parameterized by the eigenvectors of the

Laplacian graph (Bruna et al., 2013; Deﬀerrard et al., 2016). As these eigenvectors

correspond to the Fourier bases of the graph, each message passing step can

be seen as a convolution operation on the features of the graph. More recently,

Kipf et al. (Kipf & Welling, 2016) proposed the Graph Convolutional Network

(GCN) model which aggregates node features by employing the normalized graph

adjacency matrix as a transformation matrix (in this case, the transformation

is a linear projection). Since the message passing scheme of the GCN (in its

ﬁnal form) does not rely on the Fourier analysis of the graph, GCN can be

seen as a spatial-based model. Following GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016), various

models based on the spatial approach have been recently proposed. For instance,

messages are aggregated by averaging nodes’ features in (Hamilton et al., 2017),

summing over concatenated features of nodes and edges in (Duvenaud et al.,

2015), or by applying neural networks on nodes’ features (Hamilton et al., 2017)

and edges’ features in (Battaglia et al., 2016; Sch¨utt et al., 2017). Most of

these spatial-based models utilize the connections between nodes in the graph

directly as weights when aggregating node and edge features. The weight of the

connections can be pre-computed, or can be learned by leveraging the attention

6

mechanisms, as in the attention graph neural networks (GAT) model (Veliˇckovi´c

et al., 2017). In addition, other models such as the node transition-based ones

employ transition probabilities between nodes, where these probabilities are

calculated based on random walk procedures (Atwood & Towsley, 2016; Zhang

et al., 2018).

Our message passing scheme is inspired by the node transition-based models

[see (Atwood & Towsley, 2016; Zhang et al., 2018)]. The key diﬀerence between

the proposed method and these works is that we do not overestimate the inﬂuence

of the popular nodes, which leads to the performance improvement on several

graph classiﬁcation tasks.

2.2. Graph Regularization Methods

As the second contribution of this work is DropNode, a regularization tech-

nique for GCNNs, this section is dedicated to review existing regularization

methods for GCNNs. Additionally, the relations between our method and the

existing methods are presented.

Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a commonly used regularization technique

for various types of neural networks, including GCNNs. In dropout, a percentage

of neural units is kept active during training using Bernoulli distribution, which

in turn reduces the co-adapting eﬀect of neural units. In testing, by using the

full architecture, the network is able to approximate the averaging of many

thinned models, leading to better performance. Unlike dropout, our method

(DropNode) randomly removes nodes of the underlying graphs during the training

of GCNNs. Conceptually, DropNode alters the data instead of neural units of

network architecture. DropNode is similar to the work of Chen et al. (Chen

et al., 2018) in terms of random node sampling. However, we take a further

step by adding an upsampling operation, which recovers the dropped nodes

from the previous sampling step. This arrangement allows us to yield the data

augmentation eﬀect following the U-Net principle (Ronneberger et al., 2015).

In the model proposed by Gao et al. (Gao & Ji, 2019), pooling and unpooling

operations are used to create a graph-based U-Net architecture. However, the

7

pooling uses top-k selection based on scores of nodes; the scores are computed

using a scalar projection of node features. This is diﬀerent from our method

as we randomly sample nodes using the Bernoulli distribution. As a result, the

model in (Gao & Ji, 2019) does not have the regularization eﬀect because the

architecture is ﬁxed across training and testing. In the work of (Rong et al.,

2019), edges are randomly removed to regularize GCNNs, which is similar to our

method in terms of modifying the underlying graph. However, as the number of

nodes of the graph is kept unchanged, downsampling and upsampling operations

are not used. As a result, while the method in (Rong et al., 2019) is easy to

integrate to various GNN architectures, the regularization eﬀect is not as strong

as the proposed method, which alters both edges and nodes. Closest in spirit to

our work is GRAND (Feng et al., 2020), where the authors use the Bernoulli

distribution to randomly replace node feature vectors with zero vectors. Still,

GRAND keeps the structure of the original graph unchanged while we modify

the original graph’s structure, changing node transition probabilities. Besides,

GRAND leverages multiple branches to augment the graph features while we

rely on a single branch, which is simpler. Finally, diﬀerent from GRAND, we

show that the proposed DropNode can be applied to fully supervised tasks such

as graph classiﬁcation.

3. Preliminaries

3.1. Notation and Problem Formulation

Let G = (V, E) denote an undirected graph, where V is the set of nodes and

E is the set of edges. A ∈RN×N is the adjacency matrix of G, where Aij is

the weight of the corresponding edge connecting node i and node j. As G is

an undirected graph, the adjacency matrix A is symmetric (i.e., Aij = Aji).

The diagonal matrix D (where Dii = PN
j=1 Aij) denotes the degree matrix of

G. The unnormalized Laplacian matrix of G is given by L = D −A (Ortega

et al., 2018). The graph G can be fully represented using either the Laplacian

or the adjacency matrix. Each node of G is characterized by a feature vector

8

x ∈RF , where F is the feature dimensionality. Thus, all the features of the

nodes in G can be represented in the form of a matrix, X ∈RN×F where each

row corresponds to a node and each column corresponds to a feature.

Two common tasks that graph neural networks often address are (i) node

and (ii) graph classiﬁcation. Task (i) concerns predicting a label for each node

in a given graph. Speciﬁcally, for a graph G = (V, E), the set of labelled nodes

can be symbolized as VL and the set of unlabelled nodes can be symbolized as

VU, such that V = VL ∪VU. The goal of task (i) is to predict the labels for the

nodes in VU. In the case that the features and the connections of these nodes are

available during the training phase, the task follows the so-called transductive

setting (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017). On the other hand, in the

case that neither the features nor the connections of nodes in VU are given during

training, the task follows the inductive setting (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al.,

2018). Diﬀerent from the node classiﬁcation task (i.e., task (i)), the task (ii)

aims at predicting a label for each graph. For this task, only the inductive setting

is considered, that is, given a training set of graphs ST = {G1, G2, . . . , GM} and

the corresponding set of labels LT = {1, 2, . . . , C}M where C is the number of

classes and M is the number of examples in the training set, the goal is to learn

a prediction function that maps an input graph to a label in LT . In this work,

we will consider both the node and graph classiﬁcation tasks.

3.2. Random Walk and Node Transition Matrix

Random Walk is one of the most eﬀective methods to explore a graph

(see Leskovec & Faloutsos (2006)). Given a graph G = (V, E), a length constant

l, and a starting node u0 ∈V , this method generates a “walk” of length l,

represented by a sequence of nodes {u0, u1, . . . , ul}. A node is sampled for step

k in the walk, k ∈[1, l], following a distribution P(uk|uk−1), which is expressed

by:





Pij, if (vi, vj) ∈E

P(uk = vj|uk−1 = vi) =

0, if (vi, vj) /∈E.
(1)




9

In (1), Pij is the probability of transitioning from node vi to node vj. As such,

Pij is often referred to as the node transition probability. The standard way to

compute the transition probabilities is by dividing the weight of the edge (vi, vj)

by the degree of node vi (i.e., Pij = Aij

Dii ). In general, Pij ̸= Pji since the degree

of node vi is not equal to the degree of node vj. All the transition probabilities

of the nodes in G can be represented in the form of a matrix P ∈RN×N, where:

P = D−1A.
(2)

Note that PN
j=1 Pij = 1, ∀i ∈[1, N].

4. The Proposed Models

In this section, we present in detail the contribution of this work. At the

beginning, we describe existing message passing schemes (Kipf & Welling, 2016;

Zhang et al., 2018). Afterwards, we introduce the proposed scheme (which follows

node transition-based approaches) that leads to a new graph convolutional layer

formulation. Subsequently, we present DropNode, a simple yet eﬀective generic

regularization method, and we compare it with existing methods that are often

employed to regularize GCNN models.

4.1. Graph Convolutional Layers

4.1.1. Existing Formulations

As presented earlier in the Introduction section, the formulation of a graph

convolutional layer in a GCNN model fully expresses the underlying message

passing scheme. Various graph convolutional layers have been proposed in the

literature that generally follow the same formulation:

H(l+1) = σ(MH(l)W),
(3)

where H(l) ∈RN×F is the input to the l-th layer, W ∈RF ×K is the weight matrix

of this layer, M ∈RN×N is a matrix containing the aggregation coeﬃcients, and

σ is a non-linear activation function such as the sigmoid or the ReLU.

10

The message passing scheme, as shown in (3), can be broken down into two

substeps, namely the aggregate and the update substeps. In the former, node

features are ﬁrst transformed by a linear projection, which is parameterized by

learnable weights W. Subsequently, for a node in the graph, the features of its

neighbors are aggregated by performing a weighted sum with the corresponding

weights deﬁned in M. This substep can be seen as a message aggregation stage

from the neighbors of each node. In the update substep, a non-linear transforma-

tion is applied to the aggregated features to produce new representations H(l+1)

for the nodes.

The aggregation coeﬃcient matrix M deﬁnes the message passing scheme,

i.e., the way in which features are exchanged between nodes. An entry Mij of

M represents the coeﬃcient assigned to features of a source node j when being

aggregated toward a destination node i. As such, the i-th row of M speciﬁes the

weights assigned to features of all the nodes when being aggregated toward node

i. The j−th column of M speciﬁes the weights assigned to a node j when being

aggregated toward all the other nodes. Intuitively, the rows and the columns

of matrix M determine the inﬂuence of the nodes on a destination node, and

the inﬂuence of a source node on the other nodes, respectively. By deﬁning the

aggregation coeﬃcient matrix M, one can specify a message passing scheme. For

instance, in a GCN model (Kipf & Welling, 2016), M is computed by:

M = ˜D−1

2 ˜A ˜D−1

2 ,
(4)

with ˜A = A + IN and IN ∈RN×N is an identity matrix. By adding the identity

matrix IN, self-connections are taken into account, i.e., a node aggregates features

from both its neighbors and itself. ˜D is a diagonal matrix with ˜Dii = PN
j=1 ˜Aij.

In (4) each element of ˜A is normalized by a factor equal to the square root of

the product of the degrees of the two corresponding nodes, namely:

Mij =
˜Aij
p ˜Dii ˜Djj
.
(5)

Unlike GCN, the DGCNN model (Zhang et al., 2018) calculates the aggre-

11

gation coeﬃcients (Mij) as one-hop node transition probabilities (˜Pij) (see

Section 3.2):

M = ˜P = ˜D−1 ˜A.
(6)

Therefore, it can be seen that:

Mij =
˜Aij
˜Dii
.
(7)

Note that in the DGCNN model, the aggregation coeﬃcients are created

by normalizing the adjacency matrix using the degrees of the destination nodes.

Therefore, the neighboring nodes of a destination node have the same inﬂuence

(i.e., weights) on the destination node, even though their popularity level (e.g.,

node degrees) may vary signiﬁcantly. This is not desired as popular nodes are

often connected with many other nodes, thus messages from the popular nodes

are not as valuable as messages from nodes with lower level of popularity. The

issue of popular nodes has been mentioned in (Do et al., 2017; Rahimi et al.,

2015), where connections to these nodes are explicitly removed. In addition,

we observe that in many text retrieval weighing schemes such as TF-IDF, the

popular terms across documents are given smaller weights compared to less

popular terms. This observation leads us to a new message passing formula,

which we describe thoroughly in the next section.

4.1.2. The Proposed Graph Convolutional Layer

In this work, we propose a message passing scheme that makes use of the node

transition probabilities, as in the DGCNN model (Zhang et al., 2018). Unlike

the DGCNN, we use the degrees of the source nodes instead of the destination

nodes for the normalization of the aggregation coeﬃcients. Speciﬁcally, in our

scheme, the aggregation coeﬃcient matrix M is calculated as:

M = ˜AT ˜D−1,
(8)

Mij =
˜Aji
˜Djj
.
(9)

12

In (8), M contains one-hop node transition probabilities. Mij is the prob-

ability of transitioning from a source node j to a destination node i.
As

these probabilities are normalized using the degrees of the source nodes, we

have PN
i=1 Mij = 1, ∀j ∈{1, . . . , N}. It should be noted that in this case,
PN
j=1 Mij ̸= 1, which is diﬀerent from the DGCNN model (as shown in (6)). It

should be noted that ˜D is a diagonal matrix, and all the entries in the main

diagonal are greater than 0, thus the inverse matrix of ˜D can be found by simply

calculating the inverse of the individual entries on the main diagonal.

Substituting M in (8) into the generic formulation in (3), we obtain the

formulation for our graph convolutional layer as follows:

H(l+1) = σ(˜AT ˜D−1H(l)W).
(10)

We refer to this graph convolutional layer as the transition Probability based

Graph CONVolutional layer, abbreviated as GPCONV (for ease of reference,

we also use GCONV to refer to the graph convolutional layer proposed by (Kipf

& Welling, 2016)). Intuitively, as the adjacency matrix is normalized by the

degrees of source nodes, a node always has the same inﬂuence on its neighboring

nodes. Speciﬁcally, a node’s message (a.k.a., feature vector) is disseminated to

its neighbors with the same weight.

As a result, a popular node (i.e., high degree) will have a smaller inﬂuence

on its neighbors. Considering two nodes, i.e., vi and vj with diﬀerent degrees

(i.e., deg(vj) ≫deg(vi)), we can see that:

Mij(PGCN) =
˜Aji
˜Djj
< Mij(GCN) =
˜Aij
p ˜Dii ˜Djj
< Mij(DGCNN) =
˜Aij
˜Dii
.

(11)

Denote by ˜H(l+1) the result of the aggregation step, i.e., the product of the

aggregation coeﬃcient matrix and the input representations, ˜H(l+1) = MH(l).

Thus:

N
X

˜H(l+1)
i
= Mi1H(l)
1 + Mi2H(l)
2 + · · · + MiNH(l)
N =

j=1
MijH(l)
j ,

13

∀i ∈{1, . . . , N}. Here, H(l)
j
and ˜H(l+1)
i
are row vectors; H(l)
j
is the representation

of node vj at the l-th layer. It can be seen that the proposed message passing

leads to the smallest inﬂuence of node vj on the representation of node vi. This

behaviour, which we call popularity penalizing, is desired in the case that the

nodes in the neighborhood of the popular node (i.e., vj) belong to diﬀerent

clusters (i.e., these nodes belong to diﬀerent classes) and these clusters have

similar sizes. In that case, the message from the popular node is not helpful in

creating discriminative representations for the neighboring nodes.

Let us deﬁne a coeﬃcient to quantify the diversity and balance of classes

over the neighborhoods of popular nodes. Denote by Nvj the set of neighboring

nodes of node vj and let C(Nvj) be the set of the classes of these nodes, namely

that C(Nvj) contains distinct classes. The coeﬃcient, denoted by γ, is deﬁned

by:

|Nvj|
·
−P|C(Nvj )|
k=1
ck
|Nvj |log(
ck
|Nvj |)

|Vh|
X

|C(Nvj)|

γ =
4
|V |

log(|C(Nvj)|)
,
(12)

i=1

where Vh ⊂V ; Vh contains nodes with a degree greater than the 75-th percentile

of all node degrees as we are interested in popular nodes. ck indicates the number

of nodes of class k. We can see that γ is the sum of multiple elements where

each element consists of two terms. The ﬁrst term represents the diversity of

classes over the neighborhood Nvj, ranging in (0, 1). The second term is the

Shannon index (NIST, 2016), indicating the balance of the classes in Nvj and

its value is also in the range (0, 1). Clearly, γ ∈(0, 1) and a larger value of γ

will lead to a better performance of the proposed message passing.

4.1.3. Comparison with Existing Formulations

To illustrate the diﬀerence between the proposed graph convolutional layer’s

formulation and the DGCNN model (Zhang et al., 2018), we consider a simple

graph containing four nodes as shown in Fig. 1. These nodes are associated

with feature vectors X1, X2, X3 and X4 ∈RF . We denote with ˜P ∈R4×4 the

transition probability matrix, as calculated in (6), and the aggregate step in the

14

0
1
3
1

1
3

1

12

1
4

1

1

1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1

𝑷𝟒𝟒

𝑋)$

12

8

12

𝑀= 𝐴$ =

𝐴1 =

(a)

(b)

0
1

1
2
0

⋮
𝑋)%

𝑋) =

8

1
3

1

0
1
3

𝑋&$

𝐻+! = 0.33𝑋! + 0.29𝑋" + 0.33𝑋#
4
𝑷𝟒𝟐

𝑷𝟐𝟐

12

⋮
𝑋&%

𝑋& =

𝑷𝟐𝟒

2

0.33
0.33
0
0.33
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0
0.5
0.5
0
0.33
0.33
0
0.33

𝑷𝟏𝟒
𝑷𝟒𝟏

𝑀= 𝑃$ =

(c)

𝑷𝟏𝟐

𝐻+! = 0.33𝑋! + 0.33𝑋" + 0.33𝑋#

𝑷𝟑𝟐
𝑷𝟐𝟏

𝑷𝟐𝟑

0.33
0.25
0
0.33
0.33
0.25
0.5
0.33
0
0.25
0.5
0
0.33
0.25
0
0.33

𝑷𝟑𝟑

𝑀= 𝑃$$ =

1

(d)

𝑋$$

⋮
𝑋$%

𝑋$ =

𝑋'$

3

𝐻+! = 0.33𝑋! + 0.25𝑋" + 0.33𝑋#

⋮
𝑋'%

𝑋' =

𝑷𝟏𝟏

Figure 1:
A graph with four nodes and four edges (solid lines) with directed transition

probabilities indicated by dashed lines. (a) shows the adjacency matrix with self-connections

added. (b), (c) and (d) show the equations to calculate the aggregated feature representation

(i.e., ˜H2) for node 1, following the formulations in the GCN model (Kipf & Welling, 2016),

the DGCNN model (Zhang et al., 2018) and the proposed scheme, respectively. We observe

that in the proposed scheme, (i) the highest-degree node (i.e., node 2) is less inﬂuential in

calculating ˜H1 than the other nodes, which are of lower degrees, and (ii) the overall inﬂuence

of a node on their neighboring nodes are the same (i.e., entries in a column, where there exist

corresponding connections, have the same value.).

DGCNN model produces an aggregated feature representation for node 1 as:

˜H1 = ˜P11X1 + ˜P12X2 + ˜P13X3 + ˜P14X4

= 0.33X1 + 0.33X2 + 0.33X4
(13)

Using the proposed scheme (i.e., (8)), we obtain:

˜H1 = ˜P11X1 + ˜P21X2 + ˜P31X3 + ˜P41X4

= 0.33X1 + 0.25X2 + 0.33X4
(14)

Even though (14) has the same form as (13), the intuitions behind the two are

diﬀerent. On one hand, the messages in the DGCNN model are passed following

the transition probabilities from destination nodes to source node. For instance,

15

the message of node 2 (X2) is passed with a weight equal to ˜P12, which is the

transition probability from node 1 (destination node) to node 2 (source node).

On the other hand, in our formulation, the messages are passed following the

transition probabilities in the reverse direction, namely, from the source nodes to

destination node. This diﬀerence results in an important distinction in the way

the inﬂuence (i.e., weights) of the nodes are determined.
As shown in Fig.1,

the DGCNN model gives a weight of 0.33 to X2 in calculating ˜H1 while the

proposed scheme uses a weight of 0.25. Bear in mind that node 2 has the highest

degree of 4 (self-loop added), we can conclude that the proposed scheme gives

lower weight to nodes with a higher degree. This leads to an eﬀect similar to the

TF-IDF weighting scheme as discussed in Section 4.1.1. Next, we will present

how we build GCNN models, with the GPCONV layer as the main building

block, for node and graph classiﬁcation tasks.

4.2. Node and Graph Classiﬁcation Models

Using the proposed GPCONV layer as a building block, we construct GCNN

models for the node and graph classiﬁcation tasks.

4.2.1. Node Classiﬁcation Model

Our node classiﬁcation model consists of L GPCONV layers. The model’s

operation can be expressed by:

O = softmax

Mσ

. . . σ

MXW1

. . .

WL

.
(15)

In this (15), M contains transition probabilities calculated using (8), O ∈RN×C

are the predicted class probabilities where C is the number of classes. Note that

the number of GPCONV layers, LGPCONV, is a design choice. We refer to this

model as the PGCNn model where P refers to transition probabilities and n

stands for node classiﬁcation.

4.2.2. Graph Classiﬁcation Model

For graph the classiﬁcation task, we need to predict a single label for the

whole graph. To address this task, we design a model (similar to the node

16

classiﬁcation one) with a global pooling and several fully-connected layers added

on top of the last GPCONV layer. The pooling operator is employed to produce

a single representation for the whole graph, while the fully-connected layers and a

softmax classiﬁer are used to output the predicted label probabilities. There are

several pooling techniques for graph classiﬁcation, such as SortPooling (Zhang

et al., 2018), DiffPool (Ying et al., 2018), Top-K-Selection (Gao & Ji, 2019),

max-pooling (Zhang et al., 2018) and mean-pooling (Simonovsky & Komodakis,

2017; Monti et al., 2019; Bianchi et al., 2019). In our model, we use the global

mean-pooling as it has been proven eﬀective and is widely used for the task of

graph classiﬁcation (Monti et al., 2019; Bianchi et al., 2019). We refer to our

graph classiﬁcation model as the PGCNg. Here, g stands for graph classiﬁcation,

which diﬀerentiates it from the proposed node classiﬁcation model PGCNn. The

PGCNg can be expressed by:

H = σ

Mσ

. . . σ

MXW1

. . .

WL

(16)

h = mean-pooling

H

(17)

o = softmax

FC

h

(18)

The (16), (17), (18) are written for one graph, so H ∈RN×K is a 2−D

matrix, h ∈RK and o ∈RC are vectors. FC indicates the fully-connection part

of the PGCNg model. In practice, multiple graphs can be stacked together by

concatenating the corresponding adjacency matrices diagonally and concatenat-

ing the feature matrices vertically. In that case, the pooling operation in (17) is

applied graph-wise.

4.3. DropNode Regularizer

In this section, we present the proposed DropNode regularization method in

detail. After that, we show how this method could be further incorporated into

the node and graph classiﬁcation models introduced in Section 4.2, and ﬁnally

we describe the connection between DropNode and the well-known dropout

regularization method (Srivastava et al., 2014).

17

4.3.1. DropNode

The basic idea behind DropNode is to randomly sample sub-graphs from

an input graph at each training iteration. This is achieved by dropping nodes

following a Bernoulli distribution with a pre-deﬁned probability 1 −p, p ∈(0, 1).

Furthermore, an edge is retained if its nodes are kept; otherwise, the edge is

discarded.

Such node dropping procedure can be seen as a downsampling operation.

Therefore, DropNode can be implemented as an individual downsampling layer,

which can be integrated to diﬀerent levels of a graph neural network. Denote by

H(l) ∈RN×Kl the input of the l-th downsampling layer, the following equations

describe how DropNode works:

r = (r1, . . . , rN)T ,
(19)

ri ∼Bernoulli(p), i ∈{1, . . . , N},
(20)

H(l+1), ID(l) = SELECT(H(l), r).
(21)

In (19), r is a vector containing i.i.d random variables responsible for deciding

which nodes should be kept. In (21), only rows corresponding with ri = 1

are retained, leading to a sub-matrix H(l+1) ∈RNl×Kl, where Nl = pN on

average. The second output ID(l) is a vector containing indices of selected rows,

corresponding to the retained nodes. The output of the downsampling layer can

become the input for a graph convolutional layer. Thus, the adjacency matrix

also needs to be modiﬁed by

˜A(l+1) = SELECT(˜A(l), r),
(22)

where only rows and columns corresponding to ri = 1 are kept.
The new

adjacency matrix in (22) is then used for computing the aggregation coeﬃcient

matrix M following the chosen message passing formulation (see Section 4.1).

Depending on speciﬁc tasks (e.g., node classiﬁcation), upsampling layers

might be needed to reconstruct the original graph structure. An upsampling

18

layer is paired with a downsampling layer and uses the index vector of the

downsampling layer for the reconstruction.
Speciﬁcally, suppose the l-th

downsampling layer is paired with the k-th upsampling layer where k > l, this

upsampling layer takes as input a matrix H(k) ∈RNl×Kk and produces an

output matrix H(k+1) ∈RN×Kk. Each row in H(k) is copied to a row in H(k+1)

according to the index vector ID(l) obtained by the l-th downsamling layer. The

rows in H(k+1) that do not correspond to a row in H(l) are ﬁlled in with zeros.

Similar to dropout, the proposed DropNode method operates only during

the training phase. During the testing phase, all the nodes in the graph are used

for prediction. We should note that in the case that the upsampling layers are

not employed, the output of each downsampling layer needs to be scaled by a

factor of 1

p. This scaling operation is to maintain the same expected outputs for

neurons in the subsequent layer during the training and testing phases (similar

to dropout).

An important property of DropNode is that one or multiple sub-graphs are

randomly sampled at each training iteration. Hence, the model does not see

all the nodes during the training phase. As a result, the model should not rely

on only a single prominent local pattern or on a small number of nodes, but to

leverage information from all the nodes in the graph. The risk for the model to

memorize the training samples, therefore, is reduced, avoiding over-ﬁtting. In

addition, the model is trained using multiple deformed versions of the original

graphs. This can be considered as a data augmentation procedure, which is

often used as an eﬀective regularization method (DeVries & Taylor, 2017). On

the other hand, the DropNode method reduces connectivity between nodes in

the graph. Lower connectivity helps alleviate the smoothing of representation

of the nodes when the GCNN model becomes deeper (Rong et al., 2019). As a

result, features of nodes in diﬀerent clusters will be more distinguishable, which

could lead to an improved performance on diﬀerent downstream tasks for deep

GCNN models.

4.3.2. Dropping Strategies

19

In Section 4.3.1, we have presented DropNode, which relies on the Bernoulli

distribution to sample sub-graphs from the original graph. While this strategy

is simple, it is structure-agnostic. In literature, there are many approaches for

sampling graphs, including Random Page Rank Node (RPN), Random Edge (RE),

Random Node Neighbo (RNN) and Random Walk (RW) (Leskovec & Faloutsos,

2006). It is found that RW is one of the most eﬀective graph sampling approaches

w.r.t. preserving graph properties such as clustering coeﬃcient (Leskovec &

Faloutsos, 2006). Therefore, it is tempting to investigate the RW-based node

dropping for DropNode. In this section, we look into the detailed eﬀect of the

Bernoulli-based dropping introduced earlier and the RW-based dropping.

Let us ﬁrst study the Bernoulli-based dropping approach (B-dropping) by

considering a graph G = (V, E), where |V | = N and |E| = M.
Thus the

probability of the existence of an edge of G is p(u,v) =
M
(
N
2). As the probability

for selecting a node is p, on average n = ⌊pN⌋nodes will be retained. Sub-graphs

thus have the expected number of edges as follows:

m = M
n
2


N
2
.
(23)

Therefore, the sub-graphs created by the B-dropping approach can be modelled

by an Erd˝os–R´enyi (ER) process (Erd˝os & R´enyi, 1960), with n = ⌊pN⌋nodes

and m edges. We will show later that the sub-graphs created by the B-dropping

have some properties of the ER model.

Diﬀerent from the B-dropping, the RW-dropping statistically maintains the

local structure of the underlying graph. The RW-dropping follows the random

walk procedure introduced in Section 3.2 with two small modiﬁcations. First,

if a node is re-visited, we ignore it and move to another node. Furthermore, if

the walk is stuck (e.g., if we visit a small connected component), we jump to a

node which has not been visited. These modiﬁcations will allow a deterministic

number of nodes for each sampling step. We will see later that the RW-dropping

approach tends to preserve local clusters, leading to a clustering coeﬃcient

similar to that of the original graph. Eventually, this approach tends to produce

small-world sub-graphs (Watts & Strogatz, 1998). As a result, RW-dropping

20

GPCONV

GPCONV

Softmax

𝑿∈ℝ𝑵×𝑭
𝑯(𝟏) ∈ℝ𝑵×𝑲𝟏

𝑯(𝟒) ∈ℝ𝑵×𝑲𝟐
𝑶∈ℝ𝑵×𝑪

𝑿: Feature

Removed

in
testing

Downsampling
Upsampling

phase

GPCONV

𝑯(𝟐) ∈ℝ𝒑𝑵×𝑲𝟏
𝑯(𝟑) ∈ℝ𝒑𝑵×𝑲𝟐

Figure 2: The structure of the PGCNn + DropNode model with two GPCONV layers and one

pair of downsampling-upsampling layers for the node classiﬁcation task.

may result in better node representations, leading to better performance for

downstream tasks. However, as the RW-dropping has to be done step by step,

thus this approach is slower compared to the B-dropping.

4.3.3. Incorporating DropNode into the PGCNn Model

Figure 2 shows an example of how we incorporate DropNode into a PGCNn

model for the node classiﬁcation task. In this example, we employ three GPCONV

layers and a pair of downsampling and upsampling layers. Given a graph G with

input features X, the model transforms X through the ﬁrst GPCONV layer into

H(1). Subsequently, the downsampling layer randomly drops a subset of rows of

the transformed feature vectors H(1). The remaining features H(2) are fed into

the second GPCONV layer. For the node classiﬁcation task, it is essential to

keep the same number of nodes at the output. To this end, an upsampling layer

(see Section 4.3.1) is used to reconstruct the original graph structure. The output

of this layer serves as input to the third GPCONV and a softmax classiﬁer to

produce class probabilities for all the nodes of the graph. It should be noted that

the number of GPCONV layers LGPCONV and downsampling-upsampling layer

pairs LDU are hyper-parameters of this model, thus more complex architectures

can be formed by increasing these parameters.
We refer to this model as the

21

Downsampling

GPCONV

Global
Mean
Pooling

FC Layer

FC Layer

Softmax
𝑶∈ℝ𝑪

𝑯∈ℝ𝑫

𝑿: Feature

𝑿∈ℝ𝑵×𝑭
𝑯(𝟏) ∈ℝ𝑵×𝑲𝟏

𝑯(𝟐) ∈ℝ𝒑𝑵×𝑲𝟏

GPD

Figure 3: The PGCNg + DropNode model for graph classiﬁcation. A GPCONV layer is

combined with a downsampling layer to create a GPD block. Several GPD blocks can be

stacked together to achieve better expressiveness power. The output of the ﬁnal GPD block

will be globally mean pooled making the ﬁnal representation of the graph as denoted by H.

One or several fully-connected layer(s) (FC layers) and a softmax classiﬁer are employed to

predict the label of the graph.

PGCNn + DropNode model.

4.3.4. Incorporating DropNode into the PGCNg Model

Figure 3 shows an example of how DropNode can be integrated with the

PGCNg model for the graph classiﬁcation task.
We refer to this model as

PGCNg + DropNode.
The model has a block consisting of one GPCONV

layer and one downsampling layer, which is abbreviated to “GPD” block. The

GPD block is followed by a simple mean-pooling layer which produces a single

representation vector for the whole graph.
While there exist several more

advanced pooling techniques such as DiﬀPool (Ying et al., 2018) and k-max

pooling (Gao & Ji, 2019), we choose the mean-pooling as it is simple and pooling

is not a focus of this work.
Then, two fully-connected layers act as a classiﬁer

on that representation vector. Similar to the PGCNn + DropNode model (see

Section 4.3.3), the numbers of GPD blocks LGPD and fully-connected layers LFC

are hyper-parameters of the PGCNg + DropNode model. In graph classiﬁcation,

the reconstruction of the graph structure is not needed as we only need a single

label for an input graph (i.e., unlike the case of the node classiﬁcation task). As

such, it is not necessary to employ upsampling layers in the PGCNg +DropNode

model. As a result, the outputs of each downsampling layer need to be scaled by

a factor of 1

p during training as mentioned earlier in Section 4.3.1.

22

1
1
1

𝑿""
𝑿"#
𝑿"$
𝑿"%

𝑿""
𝑿"#
0
𝑿"%

𝑿#"
𝑿##
𝑿#$ 𝑿#%

𝑿#"
0
𝑿#$ 𝑿#%

1
1
1

1
1
1

𝑿$" 𝑿$# 𝑿$$ 𝑿$%

𝑿$" 𝑿$#
0
𝑿$%

𝑿%" 𝑿%# 𝑿%$ 𝑿%%

𝑿%" 𝑿%# 𝑿%$
0

1
1
1

1
1
1

𝑿&" 𝑿&# 𝑿&$ 𝑿&%

0
𝑿&# 𝑿&$ 𝑿&%

𝑿 ∈ 𝑹𝟓×𝟒
𝑿. ∈ 𝑹𝟓×𝟒
𝑝= 0.75

Figure 4: Dropout applied to feature matrix X. Several neural units corresponding to elements

on each row of X are randomly deactivated during the training phase. This operation produces

matrix X′ of the same shape as the input.

𝑿""
𝑿"#
𝑿"$
𝑿"%

𝑿#"
𝑿##
𝑿#$ 𝑿#%

𝑿#"
𝑿##
𝑿#$ 𝑿#%

1

𝑿$" 𝑿$# 𝑿$$ 𝑿$%

𝑿$" 𝑿$# 𝑿$$ 𝑿$%

1

𝑿%" 𝑿%# 𝑿%$ 𝑿%%

𝑿&" 𝑿&# 𝑿&$ 𝑿&%

𝑿-- ∈ 𝑹𝟑×𝟒

𝑿&" 𝑿&# 𝑿&$ 𝑿&%

1

𝑝= 0.75

𝑿 ∈ 𝑹𝟓×𝟒

Figure 5: DropNode applied to feature matrix X. Unlike dropout, some rows are randomly

eliminated, leading to matrix X′′ with smaller number of rows.

4.3.5. Connection between DropNode and Dropout

DropNode and dropout both involve dropping activations in a layer of a neural

network, yet, they are conceptually diﬀerent. In DropNode, all the activations

of a node are dropped. On the contrary, in dropout, the dropping is distributed

across the nodes, so that on average, each node has a ratio of activations dropped.

In addition, with DropNode, the structure of the graph is altered, while this

does not happen in dropout. Implementation-wise, let X ∈RN×K be the input,

dropout produces a matrix X′ ∈RN×K of the same dimensions as X in which

some entries are randomly set to zero; whereas, DropNode produces a sub-matrix

X′′ ∈R⌊pN⌋×K where p ∈(0, 1). Figures 4, 5 show the diﬀerence between

dropout and DropNode.

23

Table 1: Datasets for the node classiﬁcation tasks. +/−indicates whether the corresponding

features are available or unavailable. The numbers in parentheses denote the dimensionality of

the corresponding feature vectors. γ is the diversity-balance coeﬃcient deﬁned in Section 4.1.2.

CORA
CITESEER
PUBMED

# Nodes
2708
3327
19, 717

# Edges
5429
4732
44, 338

# Labels
7
6
3

Node Attr.
+(1433)
+(3703)
+(500)

Edge Attr.
−
−
−

γ
0.15
0.33
0.13

5. Experiments

5.1. Datasets

In our experiments, we consider both node and graph classiﬁcation tasks.

For node classiﬁcation, we use three benchmark citation network datasets1,

namely, CORA, CITESEER and PUBMED (Sen et al., 2008). Graphs are

created for these datasets by considering scientiﬁc papers as nodes and references

between the papers as edges.
Each node is represented by a bag-of-words

feature vector extracted from the corresponding document. In these datasets,

all the nodes are labeled. Following Kipf et al. (Kipf & Welling, 2016) and

Veliˇckovi´c et al. (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017), we consider the graphs of CORA,

CITESEER and PUBMED undirected, although the references are actually

directed. The description of the considered datasets for node classiﬁcation is

presented in Table 1.

Concerning the graph classiﬁcation task, we employ the following datasets2:

the bioinformatics datasets, namely ENZYMES, PROTEINS, D&D, MUTAG;

the scientiﬁc collaboration dataset COLLAB (Kersting et al., 2016); the chemical

compound dataset NCI1. In the bioinformatics datasets, each graph represents

1
2

24

Table 2: Datasets for graph classiﬁcation task. +/−indicates whether the corresponding

features are available or unavailable. The numbers in parentheses denote the dimensionality of

the corresponding feature vectors. γ is the average diversity-balance coeﬃcient calculated on a

set of graphs.

PROTEINS
D&D
ENZYMES
MUTAG
NCI1

# Graph
1113
1178
600
188
4110

# Label
2
2
6
2
2

# Avg. Node
39.06
284.32
32.63
17.93
29.87

# Avg. Edge
72.82
715.66
62.14
19.79
32.30

Node Label
+
+
+
+
+

Edge Label
−
−
−
+
−

Node Attr.
+(29)
−
+(18)
−
−

Edge Attr.
−
−
−
−
−

γ
0.25
0.56
0.29
0.0005
0.03

a biological structure. For the COLLAB dataset, a graph represents an ego-

network of researchers who have collaborated with each other (Gomez et al.,

2017). The NCI1 dataset represents the activity against non-small cell lung

cancer (Gomez et al., 2017). The description of these datasets is presented in

Table 2.

5.2. Experimental Setup

For both node and graph classiﬁcation tasks, we employ classiﬁcation accu-

racy as the performance metric. Concerning the node classiﬁcation task, similar

to (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017), we consider the transductive ex-

perimental setting (see Section 3). We employ the standard train/validation/test

set splits of all the considered datasets for node classiﬁcation to guarantee a

fair comparison with prior works (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017;

Gao & Ji, 2019). That is, (140/500/1000) nodes are used for the CORA dataset,

(120/500/1000) nodes are used for the CITESEER dataset and (60/500/1000)

nodes are used for the PUBMED dataset. It is worth mentioning that the

amount of labelled nodes is much smaller than the amount of test nodes, which

makes the task highly challenging. Similar to (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017; Gao & Ji,

25

2019; Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018), we report the mean and standard deviation of the

results over 100 runs with random weight initialization.

Concerning the graph classiﬁcation task, following existing works (Ying et al.,

2018; Zhang et al., 2018), we employ a 10-fold cross validation procedure and

report the average accuracy over the folds. Among the graph classiﬁcation

datasets, only PROTEINS and ENZYMES provide node features (see Table 2),

which can be used directly as input to the proposed models. For the rest of the

datasets, we use the degree and the labels of the nodes as features.

We compare the performance of our models with state-of-the-art baseline

models. Speciﬁcally, for the node classiﬁcation task, the selected baselines are the

GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016), GAT (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamil-

ton et al., 2017), DGI (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018), GMNN (Qu et al., 2019), Graph

U-Net (Gao & Ji, 2019), DGCNN (Zhang et al., 2018), and DropEdge (Rong

et al., 2019) models. The DGCNN model is originally designed for graph classi-

ﬁcation. In order to use this model for node classiﬁcation, we employ only its

message passing mechanism (see Section 4.1.1), ignoring its pooling part. For the

graph classiﬁcation task, the Graph U-Net (Gao & Ji, 2019), DGCNN (Zhang

et al., 2018), DiﬀPool (Ying et al., 2018), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017),

CapsGNN (Xinyi & Chen, 2019) and SAGPool (Lee et al., 2019) models are

selected. In addition, following (Luzhnica et al., 2019), we employ two simple

baseslines including a fully-connected neural network with two hidden layers

denoted by FCN, and a combination of FCN with one graph convolutional layer

(GCONV) from the popular GCN model (Kipf & Welling, 2016) (see Section

Section 4.1.1) denoted as GCN + 2FC. For each baseline model and a bench-

mark dataset, we select the best results reported in the corresponding paper (if

available). Otherwise, we collect the results using either the implementations

released by the corresponding authors or self-implemented source code.

5.3. Hyperparameter Settings

Hyperparameters of the proposed models are found empirically via tun-

ing. For the node classiﬁcation model PGCNn, we use two GPCONV layers

26

(LGPCONV = 2).
This choice also follows the best conﬁguration suggested

in (Kipf & Welling, 2016). Each GPCONV layer has a hidden dimension of

64. In addition, dropout is added after each GPCONV layer with a dropping

rate of 0.7. When DropNode is used (i.e., the PGCNn + DropNode model), we

employ three GPCONV layers (LGPCONV = 3), also with a hidden dimension of

64, and a pair of downsampling-upsampling layers. Compared to the PGCNn

model, one additional GPCONV layer is added between the downsampling and

upsampling layers. The downsampling layer of DropNode has the keep ratio p

selected in such a way that 200 nodes are retained for all the datasets. We do

not employ dropout for PGCNn + DropNode as the DropNode has already had

the regularization eﬀect on the considered model. We train the two models with

learning rates of 0.01 and 0.001, respectively.

For our graph classiﬁcation models, namely, PGCNg and PGCNg+DropNode,

we employ one GPCONV layer (LGPCONV = 1) and a single GPD block (LGPD =

1), respectively. Both models use two fully-connected layers (LFC=2). The

GPCONV and the fully-connected layers have 512 hidden units each.
We

employ dropout after each layer with a dropping ratio of 0.5 in the PGCNg

model. Similar to the PGCNn + DropNode model, we do not use dropout for

PGCNg + DropNode. For the PGCNg + DropNode, the keep ratio p is set to

p = 0.75, which is much higher than that used for the node classiﬁcation models.

This is due to the fact that in the considered graph classiﬁcation datasets, the

graph sizes are much smaller than those in the node classiﬁcation datasets (see

Table 2). We train both models using a small learning rate of 0.0001.

5.4. Experimental Results

5.4.1. Node Classiﬁcation

The node classiﬁcation results of diﬀerent models are reported in Table 3.

The reported results include the mean and standard deviation of classiﬁcation

accuracy over 100 runs. The results show that the PGCNn and GCN (Kipf

& Welling, 2016) models achieve higher accuracy compared to the DGCNN

model. This can be attributed to better message passing schemes giving smaller

27

Table 3: Node classiﬁcation results in terms of the accuracy evaluation metric (%). We report

the mean and standard deviation of the accuracy over 100 runs. The bold font indicates

the best performance. Our models include PGCNn and PGCNn + DropNode. In addition,

we apply DropNode to the common GCN model (Kipf & Welling, 2016), referred to as

GCNn + DropNode. The asterisk (*) for DGCNN indicates that the result is obtained by

using our own implementation, where only the message passing formulation of the original

method is employed.

Method
CORA
CITESEER
PUBMED

GCN + DropEdge (2019)
82.80
72.30
79.60

GMNN (2019)
83.7
72.9
81.8

GCN (2016)
81.9 ± 0.7
70.5 ± 0.8
78.9 ± 0.5

DGCNN∗(2018)
81.4 ± 0.5
69.8 ± 0.7
78.1 ± 0.4

GAT (2017)
83.0 ± 0.7
72.5 ± 0.7
79.0 ± 0.3

Graph U-Net (2019)
84.4 ± 0.6
73.2 ± 0.5
79.6 ± 0.2

DGI (2018)
82.3 ± 0.6
71.8 ± 0.7
76.8 ± 0.6

PGCNn
81.7 ± 0.5
70.6 ± 0.7
78.4 ± 0.4

GCNn + DropNode
84.6 ± 1.0
74.3 ± 0.5
82.7 ± 0.2

PGCNn + DropNode
85.1 ± 0.7
74.3 ± 0.6
83.0 ± 0.3

weights to popular nodes presented in Section 4.1.2 as these three models

have similar conﬁguration including number of graph convolutional layers and

number of hidden units in each layer. Furthermore, the PGCNn model achieves

marginally better performance compared to the popular GCN model on the

CITESEER dataset, reaching 70.6% compared to 70.5% obtained by the GCN

model. Nevertheless, the PGCNn model performs slightly worse than the GCN

model on the CORA and PUBMED datasets, amounting to a 0.2% and 0.5%

drop in terms of accuracy. This can be explained by the fact that the diversity-

balance coeﬃcient (γ) of the CITESEER dataset is the highest (i.e., γ = 0.33)

compared to the CORA and PUBMED datasets (i.e., γ = 0.15 and γ = 0.13,

respectively, see Table 1). The coeﬃcient γ reﬂects the diversity and balance of

classes in the neighborhoods of high-degree nodes, and a higher value of γ means

that messages from high-degree nodes are not useful. Recall that the PGCNn

model assigns lower weights on high-degree nodes. Therefore, the PGCNn favors

28

the CITESEER dataset compared to the others.
In addition, compared to the

other baseline models, the PGCNn model achieves lower accuracy on CORA,

whereas it produces comparable results on CITESEER and PUBMED. When

DropNode is used, it consistently improves the performance of all considered

models. Speciﬁcally, PGCNn + DropNode and GCNn + DropNode signiﬁcantly

improve the performance of PGCNn and GCNn by around 4 percentage points

of accuracy. In particular, GCNn +DropNode can reach 84.6%, 74.3% and 82.7%

while PGCNn + DropNode achieves the best performance with 85.1%, 74.3%

and 83.0% on the CORA, CITESEER and PUBMED datasets, respectively.

It is worth recalling that in our setting, the number of training examples is

much smaller compared to the number of testing examples. By using DropNode,

deformed versions of the underlying graph are created during each training epoch.

In other words, DropNode acts as an augmentation technique on the training

data which leads to an increased performance.

5.4.2. Graph Classiﬁcation

The results for graph classiﬁcation are given in Table 4. In addition to the

models mentioned in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3.1, we also provide the result

produced by a simple fully-connected neural network, denoted by FCN, with

two hidden layers; each has size of 512 units. We observe that the simple FCN

can achieve high classiﬁcation accuracy compared to presented strong baselines

on some datasets. For instance, FCN obtains 74.68% on PROTEINS, which

is around 4 percentage points higher than the performance of GraphSAGE

and SAGPoolg, and approximately 3 percentage points higher than SAGPoolh.

The good performance of structure-blind fully-connect neural network has been

reported by (Luzhnica et al., 2019), which is also conﬁrmed in our work. By

adding a GCONV or GPCONV layer on top of the FCN model (GCN + 2FC,

PGCNg + 2FC) the accuracy on PROTEINS, DD and ENZYMES is marginally

improved while the accuracy on NCI1 is improved by 6 percentage points. This is

because the GCONV / GPCONV layers are able to exploit the graph structure of

the considered bioinformatics datasets. Additionally, the PGCNg + 2FC model

29

Table 4: Graph classiﬁcation result in terms of percent (%). FCN stands for fully-connected

neural network (2 FC layers). N/A stands for not available. Daggers mean the results are

produced by running the code of the authors on corresponding datasets (the results are not

available in the original paper).

Method
PROTEINS
DD
ENZYMES
MUTAG
NCI1

Diﬀ-Pool (GraphSAGE) (2018)
70.48
75.42
54.25
N/A
N/A

Diﬀ-Pool (Soft Assign) (2018)
76.25
80.64
62.53
88.89†
80.36†

Graph U-Net (2019)
77.68
82.43
48.33†
86.76†
72.12†

CapsGNN (2019)
76.28
75.38
54.67
86.67
78.35

DGCNN (2018)
75.54
79.37
46.33†
85.83
74.44

SAGPoolg (2019)
70.04
76.19
N/A
N/A
74.18

SAGPoolh (2019)
71.86
76.45
N/A
N/A
67.45

FCN (2FC)
74.68
75.47
66.17
87.78
69.69

GCN + 2FC
74.86
75.64
66.45
86.11
75.90

PGCNg + 2FC
75.13
78.46
66.17
85.55
75.84

GCNg + DropNode
76.58
79.32
69.00
87.27
79.03

PGCNg + DropNode
77.21
80.69
70.50
89.44
81.11

favors the DD dataset as the coeﬃcient γ is the highest compared to other

datasets, which is similar to node classiﬁcation results (see Table 2).
By using

DropNode, the performance of our models is further improved. Speciﬁcally,

our model with a single GPCONV layer, two FC layers and DropNode (i.e.,

PGCNg + DropNode) outperforms all the baselines on PROTEINS, ENZYMES,

MUTAG and NCI1, except for DD where our models perform slightly worse

compared to the Graph U-Net model. Even we do not outperform the Graph

U-Net on the DD dataset, is is clear that DropNode improves the PGCNg by

more than 2% accuracy point. This again conﬁrms the consistency of DropNode

in improving GCNN models.

5.5. The Eﬀect of DropNode on Deep GCNNs

In this section, we investigate the eﬀect of DropNode on deeper graph

convolutional models. Speciﬁcally, we run our best model, which is comprised of

many GPCONV layers with and without DropNode for node classiﬁcation on

the CORA and CITESEER datasets. The number of GPCONV layers LGPCONV

30

Table 5: Number of nodes kept for downsampling layers. 3GPCONV indicates that there are

three GPCONV layers used. #DL stands for downsampling layer dimensionality. “−” means

not applicable.

3GPCONV
5GPCONV
7GPCONV
9GPCONV

#DL 1
200
200
200
200

#DL 2
−
150
150
150

#DL 3
−
−
100
100

#DL 4
−
−
−
50

is set to 5, 7 and 9; each GPCONV layer has a hidden dimension of 64. The

numbers of nodes that are kept in each case are shown in Table 5. The rest of the

parameters have the same values as presented in Section 5.3. The corresponding

results are presented in Table 6.

We observe that the performance of the GCN and PGCNn models decreases

signiﬁcantly when the number of hidden layers increases. Speciﬁcally, 9GPCONV-

layer GCN produces an accuracy score of only 13% on CORA and 22.2% on

CITESEER while similar performance is produced by a PGCNn model with

9GPCONV layers. This can be explained by the fact that (i) deep GCN /

PGCNn models have many more parameters compared to the shallow ones,

which are prone to over-ﬁtting, and (ii) the deep models suﬀer from over-

smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019), which results in indistinguishable

node representations for the diﬀerent classes. By applying DropNode on both

models, the classiﬁcation accuracy is improved signiﬁcantly, especially in the

case that 7 and 9 layers are used. This is because the eﬀects of over-ﬁtting and

over-smoothing are alleviated.

5.5.1. The Eﬀect of Dropping Strategies

To see the impact of the dropping strategy used in DropNode, we re-run

the node classiﬁcation experiments on the CORA, CITESEER and PUBMED

datasets with PGCNg model and use the RW-dropping for DropNode. The

results are presented in Table 7. It can be seen that the RW-dropping-based

DropNode leads to a better node classiﬁcation performance compared to the

31

Table 6: Accuracy (%) of deep GCNNs with DropNode integrated.

3 layers
5 layers
7 layers
9 layers

CORA CITESEER CORA CITESEER CORA CITESEER CORA CITESEER

GCN
79.1
69.0
78.8
61.8
46.2
23.0
13.0
22.2

PGCN
79.8
69.0
77.6
64.4
52.7
35.4
13.0
25.10

GCNn +

84.60
74.30
80.80
72.10
71.80
70.40
51.20
66.70

DropNode

PGCNn +

85.10
74.30
81.40
72.30
75.10
70.70
49.60
66.90

DropNode

B-dropping-based DropNode for all considered datasets. It is because the RW-

dropping tends to produce small-world sub-graphs while the B-dropping tends

to produce ER sub-graphs. The small-world sub-graphs have a high clustering

coeﬃcient, which statistically retains local topology of the original graph. On

the other hand, the ER sub-graphs do not take into account the local structure

of the original graphs, leading to a lower performance.

In Table 8, we present several statistical properties of the original graphs

and sub-graphs including the average shortest path length (L), clustering coef-

ﬁcient (C) and a small-world coeﬃcient typically denoted by σ (Humphries &

Gurney, 2008); the sub-graphs are created by the B-dropping and RW-dropping

approaches. These statistics are calculated for 100 individual sub-graphs and we

report the averaged numbers. We can see that sub-graphs created by B-dropping

have small value for C, meaning that the number of triangles is small as the

nodes are picked randomly. Inversely, sub-graphs produced by RW-dropping

tends to preserve clusters, leading to much higher values for C and σ. In order

to compute σ for a sub-graph, an ensemble of 100 equivalent ER graphs is

generated. The average shortest length (Lr) and clustering coeﬃcient (Cr) are

computed for this ensemble, which are then used to calculate σ. Typically, a

value of σ greater than 1 indicates the small-worldness of a graph. These facts

justify that the B-dropping and RW-dropping approaches tend to produce ER

and small-world graphs, respectively.

32

Table 7:
Node classiﬁcation performance using B-dropping and RW-dropping approaches.

Method
CORA
CITESEER
PUBMED

PGCNn + DropNode (B-dropping)
85.1 ± 0.7
74.3 ± 0.6
83.0 ± 0.3

PGCNn + DropNode (RW-dropping)
85.9 ± 0.4
74.9 ± 0.5
83.3 ± 0.4

Table 8:
Graph properties with respect to diﬀerent sampling strategies. L denotes the average

shortest length, C denotes the clustering coeﬃcient and σ indicates the small-world coeﬃcient.

For sub-graphs, all criteria (L, C, and σ) are the average numbers calculated on a set of 100

sub-graphs generated by the considered dropping strategies. The small-world coeﬃcient σ is

not available for PUBMED because of the extremely computational expensiveness.

Dataset
Avg. Length (L)
Clustering Coeﬀ. (C)
σ

CORA
6.31
0.2407
158.70

CORA B sub-graphs
1.81
0.0086
0.66

CORA RW sub-graphs
7.28
0.2651
14.72

CITESEER
9.33
0.1415
190.18

CITESEER B sub-graphs
1.47
0.0021
0.24

CITESEER RW sub-graphs
5.63
0.2111
16.15

PUBMED
6.34
0.0602
N/A

PUBMED B sub-graphs
1.79
0.0011
0.13

PUBMED RW sub-graphs
8.43
0.1163
5.55

6. Conclusion

In this work, we have proposed a new graph message passing mechanism,

which leverages the transition probabilities of nodes in a graph, for graph convo-

lutional neural networks (GCNNs). The proposed message passing mechanism is

simple, however, it achieves good performance for the common tasks of node and

graph classiﬁcation compared to several existing message passing formulations.

We further showed that the proposed message passing tends to work well in the

case that the neighborhoods of high-degree nodes are diversiﬁed and balanced

and we proposed a coeﬃcient to quantify the diversity and balance.
Addition-

ally, we have introduced a novel technique termed DropNode for regularizing

the GCNNs. The DropNode regularization technique can be integrated into

existing GCNN models leading to noticeable improvements for popular tasks

33

(i.e., node and graph classiﬁcation) on benchmark datasets. DropNode can

be realized with several node dropping strategies such as B-dropping or RW

leading to diﬀerent types of random graphs such as ER or small-world graphs.

We empirically showed that the RW dropping outperforms the B-dropping.

Furthermore, it has been shown that DropNode works well under the condition

that the number of labelled examples is limited, which is useful in many real-life

applications when it is normally hard and expensive to collect a substantial

amount of labelled data. Our future work will focus on generalizing the proposed

method on large graphs, e.g., reducing the computational cost of re-computing

intermediate aggregation coeﬃcient matrices in case multiple downsampling

layers are employed. Another direction for future work is to investigate diﬀerent

graph sampling techniques, which can be used for DropNode.
In addition,

as our method is general, it could be applied to a wide range of applications

involving graph-structured data such as social media or Internet-of-Things data.

References

Atwood, J., & Towsley, D. (2016). Diﬀusion-convolutional neural networks. In

Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1993–2001).

Battaglia, P., Pascanu, R., Lai, M., Rezende, D. J. et al. (2016). Interaction

networks for learning about objects, relations and physics. In Advances in

neural information processing systems (pp. 4502–4510).

Bianchi, F. M., Grattarola, D., Livi, L., & Alippi, C. (2019). Graph neural

networks with convolutional arma ﬁlters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01343, .

Bruna, J., Zaremba, W., Szlam, A., & LeCun, Y. (2013). Spectral networks and

locally connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, .

Chen, D., Lin, Y., Li, W., Li, P., Zhou, J., & Sun, X. (2019). Measuring and

relieving the over-smoothing problem for graph neural networks from the

topological view. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03211, .

34

Chen, J., Ma, T., & Xiao, C. (2018). Fastgcn: fast learning with graph convolu-

tional networks via importance sampling. arXiv:1801.10247, .

Deﬀerrard, M., Bresson, X., & Vandergheynst, P. (2016). Convolutional neural

networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering. In Advances in neural

information processing systems (pp. 3844–3852).

DeVries, T., & Taylor, G. W. (2017). Improved regularization of convolutional

neural networks with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, .

Do, T. H., Nguyen, D. M., Tsiligianni, E., Aguirre, A. L., La Manna, V. P.,

Pasveer, F., Philips, W., & Deligiannis, N. (2019). Matrix completion with

variational graph autoencoders: Application in hyperlocal air quality inference.

In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing

(ICASSP) (pp. 7535–7539).

Do, T. H., Nguyen, D. M., Tsiligianni, E., Cornelis, B., & Deligiannis, N. (2017).

Multiview deep learning for predicting twitter users’ location. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1712.08091, .

Duvenaud, D. K., Maclaurin, D., Iparraguirre, J., Bombarell, R., Hirzel, T.,

Aspuru-Guzik, A., & Adams, R. P. (2015). Convolutional networks on graphs

for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee,

M. Sugiyama, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing

Systems 28 (pp. 2224–2232). Curran Associates, Inc.

Erd˝os, P., & R´enyi, A. (1960). On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math.

Inst. Hung. Acad. Sci, 5(1), 17–60.

Feng, W., Zhang, J., Dong, Y., Han, Y., Luan, H., Xu, Q., Yang, Q., Kharlamov,

E., & Tang, J. (2020). Graph random neural networks for semi-supervised

learning on graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33.

Gao, H., & Ji, S. (2019). Graph u-nets. In International Conference on Machine

Learning (pp. 2083–2092).

35

Gao, H., Wang, Z., & Ji, S. (2018). Large-scale learnable graph convolutional

networks. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference

on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (pp. 1416–1424).

Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S. S., Riley, P. F., Vinyals, O., & Dahl, G. E. (2017).

Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th

International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 (pp. 1263–1272).

JMLR. org.

Gomez, L. G., Chiem, B., & Delvenne, J.-C. (2017). Dynamics based features

for graph classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10817, .

Hamilton, W., Ying, Z., & Leskovec, J. (2017). Inductive representation learning

on large graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp.

1024–1034).

Henaﬀ, M., Bruna, J., & LeCun, Y. (2015). Deep convolutional networks on

graph-structured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05163, .

Humphries, M. D., & Gurney, K. (2008). Network ‘small-world-ness’: a quanti-

tative method for determining canonical network equivalence. PloS one, 3(4),

e0002051.

Kearnes, S., McCloskey, K., Berndl, M., Pande, V., & Riley, P. (2016). Molecular

graph convolutions: moving beyond ﬁngerprints. Journal of computer-aided

molecular design, 30(8), 595–608.

Kersting, K., Kriege, N. M., Morris, C., Mutzel, P., & Neumann, M.

(2016). Benchmark data sets for graph kernels.

tu-dortmund.de.

Kipf, T. N., & Welling, M. (2016). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph

convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, .

Lee, J., Lee, I., & Kang, J. (2019). Self-attention graph pooling. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1904.08082, .

36

Leskovec, J., & Faloutsos, C. (2006). Sampling from large graphs. In Proceedings

of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery

and data mining (pp. 631–636). ACM.

Li, Q., Han, Z., & Wu, X.-M. (2018). Deeper insights into graph convolutional

networks for semi-supervised learning. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on

Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Li, Y., Tarlow, D., Brockschmidt, M., & Zemel, R. (2015). Gated graph sequence

neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05493, .

Luzhnica, E., Day, B., & Li`o, P. (2019). On graph classiﬁcation networks,

datasets and baselines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04682, .

Monti, F., Frasca, F., Eynard, D., Mannion, D., & Bronstein, M. M. (2019).

Fake news detection on social media using geometric deep learning. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1902.06673, .

Niepert, M., Ahmed, M., & Kutzkov, K. (2016). Learning convolutional neural

networks for graphs. In International conference on machine learning (pp.

2014–2023).

NIST (2016). Shannon diversity index.

software/dataplot/refman2/auxillar/shannon.htm.

Ortega, A., Frossard, P., Kovaˇcevi´c, J., Moura, J. M., & Vandergheynst, P. (2018).

Graph signal processing: Overview, challenges, and applications. Proceedings

of the IEEE, 106(5), 808–828.

Qi, X., Liao, R., Jia, J., Fidler, S., & Urtasun, R. (2017). 3d graph neural networks

for rgbd semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International

Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 5199–5208).

Qu, M., Bengio, Y., & Tang, J. (2019). Gmnn: Graph markov neural networks.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06214, .

37

Quek, A., Wang, Z., Zhang, J., & Feng, D. (2011). Structural image classiﬁcation

with graph neural networks. In 2011 International Conference on Digital

Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (pp. 416–421). IEEE.

Rahimi, A., Cohn, T., & Baldwin, T. (2015). Twitter user geolocation using a

uniﬁed text and network prediction model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.08259,

.

Rong, Y., Huang, W., Xu, T., & Huang, J. (2019). Dropedge: Towards deep graph

convolutional networks on node classiﬁcation. In International Conference on

Learning Representations.

Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., & Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional networks

for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical

image computing and computer-assisted intervention (pp. 234–241). Springer.

Sch¨utt, K. T., Arbabzadah, F., Chmiela, S., M¨uller, K. R., & Tkatchenko, A.

(2017). Quantum-chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature

communications, 8(1), 1–8.

Sen, P., Namata, G., Bilgic, M., Getoor, L., Galligher, B., & Eliassi-Rad, T.

(2008). Collective classiﬁcation in network data. AI magazine, 29(3), 93–93.

Simonovsky, M., & Komodakis, N. (2017). Dynamic edge-conditioned ﬁlters

in convolutional neural networks on graphs.
In Proceedings of the IEEE

conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 3693–3702).

Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R.

(2014). Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting.

The journal of machine learning research, 15(1), 1929–1958.

Teney, D., Liu, L., & van Den Hengel, A. (2017). Graph-structured representa-

tions for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1–9).

38

Veliˇckovi´c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., & Bengio, Y.

(2017). Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, .

Veliˇckovi´c, P., Fedus, W., Hamilton, W. L., Li`o, P., Bengio, Y., & Hjelm, R. D.

(2018). Deep graph infomax. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10341, .

Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998).
Collective dynamics of ‘small-

world’networks. nature, 393(6684), 440–442.

Xinyi, Z., & Chen, L. (2019). Capsule graph neural network. In International

Conference on Learning Representations.

Yao, L., Mao, C., & Luo, Y. (2019). Graph convolutional networks for text

classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence

(pp. 7370–7377). volume 33.

Ying, Z., You, J., Morris, C., Ren, X., Hamilton, W., & Leskovec, J. (2018).

Hierarchical graph representation learning with diﬀerentiable pooling. In

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 4800–4810).

Zhang, M., Cui, Z., Neumann, M., & Chen, Y. (2018). An end-to-end deep learn-

ing architecture for graph classiﬁcation. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference

on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.

Zhou, J., Cui, G., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., & Sun, M. (2018). Graph

neural networks: A review of methods and applications.
arXiv preprint

arXiv:1812.08434, .

39