Julia Kreutzer1∗, Stefan Riezler2, Carolin Lawrence3

1Google Research, Montreal, Canada
2Computational Linguistics & IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
3NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract

employed in real-world interaction with users of
NLP systems so far.
Concretely,
our
focus
is
on
sequence-to-
sequence learning for NLP applications (see § 2
for an overview).
For example, many machine
translation services provide the option for users to
give feedback on the quality of the translation, e.g.,
by collecting post-edits. Similarly, industrial chat-
bots can easily collect vast amounts of interaction
logs, which can be utilized with ofﬂine RL meth-
ods (Kandasamy et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017;
Hancock et al., 2019). In the following, we will
thus present challenges that are encountered in
user-interactive RL for NLP systems. With this
discussion, we aim to (1) encourage NLP practi-
tioners to leverage their interaction logs through
ofﬂine RL, and (2) inspire RL researchers to steel
their algorithms for the challenging applications in
NLP.

Large volumes of interaction logs can be col-
lected from NLP systems that are deployed in
the real world. How can this wealth of infor-
mation be leveraged? Using such interaction
logs in an ofﬂine reinforcement learning (RL)
setting is a promising approach. However, due
to the nature of NLP tasks and the constraints
of production systems, a series of challenges
arise. We present a concise overview of these
challenges and discuss possible solutions.

arXiv:2011.02511v3 [cs.CL] 9 Jun 2021

1
Introduction

When Natural Language Processing (NLP) sys-
tems are deployed in production, and interact with
users (“the real world”), there are many potential
ways of collecting feedback data or rich interac-
tion logs. For example, one can ask for explicit
user ratings (Kreutzer et al., 2018a), or collect user
clicks (De Bona et al., 2010), or elicit user revi-
sions (Trivedi et al., 2019) to get an estimate of
how well the deployed system is doing. However,
such user interaction logs are primarily used for an
one-off assessment of the system, e.g., for spotting
critical errors, detecting domain shifts, or identify-
ing the most successful use cases of the system in
production. This assessment can then be used to
support the decision of keeping or replacing this
system in production.
From a machine learning perspective, using in-
teraction logs only for evaluation purposes is a
lost opportunity for ofﬂine reinforcement learning
(RL). Logs of user interactions are gold mines for
off-policy learning, and they should be put to use,
rather than being forgotten after a one-off evalua-
tion purpose. To move towards the goal of using
user interaction logs for learning, we will discuss
which challenges have hindered RL from being

2
Ofﬂine Feedback for Seq2Seq in NLP

In sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) learning, the
task
is
to
map
an
input
sequence
x
=
x1, x2, . . . , x|x|, ∀xi ∈X to an output sequence
y = y1, y2, . . . , y|y|, ∀yj ∈Y, where X, Y denote
the sets of input and output vocabularies, respec-
tively. The conditional distribution of the output
sequence given the input can be modeled with a
policy πθ with learnable parameters θ. Assuming a
left-to-right generation order, the output sequence
y is generated by conditioning on previous output
elements y<j and the input sequence x:

|y|
Y

πθ(y | x) =

j=1
πθ(yj | y<j, x).
(1)

Mapping the sequence-to-sequence problem
formulation to NLP tasks, we have for example:
• Machine translation: x is a source sentence
and y the translation of x in a target language.

∗All authors contributed equally, order has been random-
ized (see

The most distinctive feature of Seq2Seq NLP
tasks for RL are the extremely large, structured
output spaces: given the output vocabulary of size
|Y| and a maximum sequence length M, there are
|Y|M possible combinations of output sequences.
For instance, in machine translation there might
be as many as 30 000 output tokens in the vocab-
ulary and the output sequence length could easily
be 100, leading to a total of 30 000100 possible out-
puts.
A successful policy identiﬁes the few combina-
tion of tokens that form valid output sequences. In
the most extreme case only one output sequence
exists that will be correct. , e.g., in a semantic
parsing setup, where potentially only one speciﬁc
SQL query will return the correct answer when ex-
ecuted. To train a policy, supervised data can be
used. There we assume a given dataset Dsup =
{(xt, yt)}T
t=1 on which the parameters θ can be
learnt with a maximum likelihood approach, aim-
ing to maximize the model score for the given ref-
erence output.

In practice, it may be too expensive to collect
correct, i.e., supervised, output sequences, since
they require skilled annotators, e.g., trained trans-
lators for a machine translation task. Therefore,
one option is to pre-train the policy on some avail-
able supervised data, which will allow the model
to concentrate on reasonable areas in the output
space (Choshen et al., 2020). The model can then
be used to produce potentially imperfect output se-
quences and humans can judge an output ˜y and
a reward δt ∈[0, 1] is assigned. Model parame-
ters may be optimized by pairing the model out-
puts with their reward estimates. Depending on
the use case, quality judgments may also exist for
single elements in the structure, adding δ(t,j) for
every step in the output sequence. The core idea
is that the weighting by δ enables learning from
imperfect outputs while respecting their faults. In
RL, these quality assessments are used to reward
desirable model actions, here desirable sequence
outputs.

T
X

t=1
δt
πθ(˜yt | xt)

LIPS = −1

µ(˜yt | xt) .
(2)

T

3
Challenges for Off-Policy RL in NLP

On top of the difﬁculties encountered in ofﬂine RL,
additionally constraints arise in production scenar-
ios. We address this and possible solutions in §3.1,
while §3.2 focuses on how to obtain reliable data
from which machine learning can succeed.

3.1
Deterministic Logging and Off-line
Learning

In order to not show inferior outputs to users, pro-
duction NLP systems show the most likely output,
which disables the typically crucial exploration

1The majority of RL research in NLP has focused on
learning from online feedback (Sokolov et al., 2016; He et al.,
2016; Li et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al., 2017; Nguyen et al.,
2017; Nogueira and Cho, 2017; Lam et al., 2018).
2The chatbot Tay might be one of the most illustrative ex-
amples for what can go wrong (Davis, 2016).

When collecting quality judgments from human

1
B
PB
b=1 δbπθ(˜yb | xb)

1
T
PT
t=1 πθ′(˜yt | xt)
.
(4)

LOSL = −

Self-normalization
discourages
increasing
the
probability of low reward data because this would
take away probability mass from higher reward
outputs and as a result. This introduces a bias in
the estimator (that decreases as T increases), how-
ever, it makes learning under deterministic logging
feasible, as has been shown for learning with real
human feedback in a semantic parsing scenario
(Lawrence and Riezler, 2018). This gives the RL
agent an edge in learning in an environment that
has been deemed impossible in the literature.
A second form of degenerate behavior occurs
because the reward δt of an output sequence is typi-
cally measured with some non-negative value, e.g.,
δt ∈[0, 1]. For example, for machine translation,
Kreutzer et al. (2018b) collect ratings for transla-
tions on a 5-point Likert scale and map the val-
ues linearly to [0, 1]. However, utilizing any of the
above objectives means that bad output sequences
with low rewards cannot actively be discouraged.
There are two possible solutions, both of which
have been used as additive control variates to re-
duce variance in gradient estimators. First, low
reward sequences can be discouraged by employ-
ing a reward baseline, where for example the av-
erage reward ∆= 1

T
X

LDPM = −1

t=1
δtπθ(˜yt | xt),
(3)

T

which closely follows the IPS objective, however,
due to the deterministic logging ∀˜y, µ(˜y | x) = 1.
While this exploration is limited by the input data,
solutions for safe exploration might be attractive to
transfer to NLP applications to actively guide ex-
ploration while not sacriﬁcing quality (Hans et al.,
2008; Berkenkamp et al., 2017).
Another option is to consider concrete cases
of degenerate behavior in estimation from logged
data. We look at two such issues and possible solu-
tions. Both problems occur irrespective of whether
data is logged deterministically or not, but the ef-
fects of the degenerative behavior might be ampli-
ﬁed in the case of deterministic logging.
The ﬁrst form of degenerate behaviour occurs
for a collected log Dlog with δ ∈[0, 1] because
IPS and DPM can trivially be minimized by set-
ting all probabilities in the dataset D to 1 for any
δt > 0 (Lawrence et al., 2017a).
Concretely,
this means, while the worst output sequences with
δt = 0 are simply ignored, all other sequences
are encouraged, even if their reward is close to 0.

t
Pt
t′=1 δt′ is subtracted from
each δt. This will cause output sequences worse
than the running average to be discouraged rather
than encouraged.
The second option is to use
the logged data Dlog to learn a reward estimator
ˆδ that can return a reward estimate for any pair
(x, y). This estimator together with the IPS ob-
jective leads to the Doubly Robust (DR) objective
(Dudik et al., 2011),

T
X

LDR = −1

h
(δt −ˆδ(xt, ˜yt)) πθ(˜yt | xt)+

T

t=1

ˆδ(xt, ˜y′) πθ(˜y′ | xt)
i
.

X

˜y′∼πθ(˜y|xt)

This objective enables the exploration of other
outputs ˜y′ that are not part of the original log and
encourages them based on the reward value re-
turned by the estimator. For the task of machine
translation, Lawrence et al. (2017b) show this ob-
jective to be the most successful in their setup,
and Kreutzer et al. (2018a) report simulation re-
sults that show that this objective can signiﬁcantly
reduce the gap between ofﬂine and online policy
learning, even if the reward estimator is not per-
fect. Zhou et al. (2017) present an alternating ap-
proach to integrating a reward estimator for explo-
ration, by switching between learning ofﬂine from
logged rewards and exploring online with the help
of a reward estimator in phases.

Surprisingly, the question of how to best im-
prove an RL agent in the scenario of learning from
real-world human feedback has been scarcely re-
searched.
This might originate from many RL
research environments coming with ﬁxed reward
functions.
In the real world, however, there is
rarely a clearly deﬁned single reward function for
which it would sufﬁce optimizing for. The sugges-
tions in Dulac-Arnold et al. (2019) seem straight-
forward: warm-starting agents to decrease sample
complexity or using inverse reinforcement learn-
ing to recover reward functions from demonstra-
tions (Wang et al., 2020) — but they require addi-
tional supervision signals that RL was supposed to
alleviate.

3.2
Reliability and Learnability of Feedback

In interactive NLP, it is unrealistic to expect any-
thing else than bandit feedback from a human user
interacting with a chatbot, automatic summariza-
tion tool, or commercial machine translation sys-
tem. That is, users of such systems will only pro-
vide a reward signal to the one output that is pre-
sented to them, and cannot be expected to rate a
multitude of outputs for the same input. As a re-
sult, the feedback is very sparse in relation to the
size of the output space.
Ideally, the user experience should not be dis-
rupted through feedback collection. Non-intrusive
interface options for example allow for corrections
of the output (“post-edits” in the context of ma-
chine translation) as a negative signal, or recording
whether the output is copied and/or shared with-
out changes, which may be interpreted as a pos-
itive signal. However, the signal might be noisy,
since the notion of output quality for natural lan-
guage generation tasks is not a well-deﬁned func-
tion to start with: Each input might have many
possible valid outputs, each of which humans may
judge differently, depending on many contextual
and personal factors. In machine translation evalu-
ation for instance, inter-rater agreements have tra-
ditionally been reported as low (Turian et al., 2003;
Carl et al., 2011; Lommel et al., 2014), especially

When it comes to the question which type of
human feedback is most beneﬁcial for training an
RL agent, one ﬁnds a lot of blanket statements,
e.g., referring to the advantages of pairwise com-
parisons (Thurstone, 1927). For instance, learning
from human pairwise preferences from humans
has been advertised for summarization (Christiano
et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020) and language
modeling (Ziegler et al., 2019), but the reliability
of the signal has not been evaluated. An excep-
tion is the work of Kreutzer et al. (2018b) which is
the ﬁrst to investigate two crucial questions. The
ﬁrst question addresses which type of human feed-
back — pairwise judgments or cardinal feedback
on a 5-point scale — can be given most reliably by
human teachers. The second question investigates
which type of feedback allows to learn reward es-
timators that best approximate human rewards and
can be best integrated into an end-to-end RL-NLP

There is large potential in NLP to leverage user
interaction logs for system improvement.
We
discussed how algorithms for ofﬂine RL can of-
fer promising solutions for this learning problem.
However, speciﬁc challenges in ofﬂine RL arise
due to the particular nature of NLP systems that
collect human feedback in real-world applications.
We presented cases where such challenges have
been found and offered solutions that have helped.
So far, the solutions have mainly been explored
in the context of machine translation and seman-
tic parsing. In the future, it will be interesting to
explore further tasks and additional real-world use
cases to ﬁnd out how to best learn from human
feedback.

Regarding the ﬁrst question, Kreutzer et al.
(2018b) found that the common assumption —
that pairwise comparisons are easier to judge than
a single output on a Likert scale (Thurstone, 1927)
— turned out to be false for the task of machine
translation.
Inter-rater reliability proved to be
higher for 5-point ratings (Krippendorff’s α =
0.51) than for pairwise judgments (α = 0.39).
(Kreutzer et al., 2018b) explain two advantages
that the Likert scale setup offers: (1) it is pos-
sible to standardize cardinal judgments for each
rater to remove individual biases, (2) they offer
an absolute anchoring for quality, while a prefer-
ence rankings leave the overall positioning of the
pair of outputs on a quality scale open. For pair-
wise judgments it is difﬁcult or even impossible
to reliably choose between two outputs that are
similarly good or bad, e.g., differing by only a
few words. Therefore, ﬁltering out raters with low
intra-rater reliability proved effective for absolute
ratings, while ﬁltering outputs with a high vari-
ance in ratings was most effective for pairwise rat-
ings, yielding the ﬁnal inter-rater reliability given
above. Discarding rated outputs, however, reduces
the size of the log to learn from, which is undesir-
able in settings where rewards are scarce or costly.

References

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu,
Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017.
An actor–
critic algorithm for sequence prediction. In 5th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR, Toulon, France.

H. Bastani, M. Bayati, and K. Khosravi. 2017.
Ex-
ploiting the natural exploration in contextual bandits.
ArXiv e-prints, 1704.09011.

Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, Angela Schoel-
lig, and Andreas Krause. 2017. Safe model-based
reinforcement learning with stability guarantees. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), pages 908–918, Long Beach, California.

To answer the second question, Kreutzer et al.
(2018b) found a neural machine translation sys-
tem can be signiﬁcantly improved using a reward
estimator trained on only a few hundred cardinal
user judgments. This work highlights that future
research in real-world RL might have to involve
studies in user interfaces or user experience, since
the interfaces for feedback collection inﬂuence the
reward function that RL agents learn from – and
thereby the downstream task success. Collecting
implicit feedback (Kreutzer et al., 2018a; Jaques
et al., 2020) might offer a better user experience.

L´eon
Bottou,
Jonas
Peters,
Joaquin
Qui˜nonero-
Candela, Denis X. Charles, D. Max Chickering,
Elon Portugaly, Dipanakar Ray, Patrice Simard, and
Ed Snelson. 2013.
Counterfactual Reasoning and
Learning Systems: The Example of Computational
Advertising.
Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 14.

Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and creative:
Evaluating translation quality using Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), Singapore.

For the challenges discussed in Sections 3.1 and
3.2, a promising approach is to tackle the arguably
simpler problem of learning a reward estimator
from human feedback ﬁrst, then provide unlim-
ited learned feedback to generalize to unseen out-
puts in off-policy RL. However, risks of bias intro-
duction and potential beneﬁts for noise reduction
through replacing user feedback by reward estima-
tors are yet to be quantiﬁed.

Michael Carl, Barbara Dragsted, Jakob Elming, Daniel
Hardt, and Arnt Lykke Jakobsen. 2011. The process
of post-editing: a pilot study. Copenhagen Studies
in Language, 41:131–142.

Olivier Chapelle and Lihong Li. 2011. An empirical
evaluation of Thompson sampling. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
Granada, Spain.

Augustine Kong. 1992.
A note on importance sam-
pling using standardized weights. Technical Report
348, Department of Statistics, University of Chicago,
Illinois.

Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Mar-
tic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. 2017. Deep Re-
inforcement Learning from Human Preferences. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), Long Beach, CA, USA.

Julia Kreutzer, Shahram Khadivi, Evgeny Matusov,
and Stefan Riezler. 2018a.
Can neural machine
translation be improved with user feedback?
In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 3 (ACL).

Ernest Davis. 2016. AI amusements: the tragic tale of
Tay the chatbot. AI Matters, 2(4):20–24.

Fabio De Bona, Stefan Riezler, Keith Hall, Massi-
miliano Ciaramita, Amac¸ Herdaˇgdelen, and Maria
Holmqvist. 2010. Learning dense models of query
similarity from user click logs.
In Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (HLT-ACL), Los An-
geles, California.

Julia Kreutzer, Joshua Uyheng, and Stefan Riezler.
2018b. Reliability and learnability of human bandit
feedback for sequence-to-sequence reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL).

Miroslav Dudik, John Langford, and Lihong Li. 2011.

Doubly robust policy evaluation and learning.
In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), Bellevue, WA.

Tsz Kin Lam, Julia Kreutzer, and Stefan Riezler.
2018. A reinforcement learning approach to inter-
active-predictive neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Euro-
pean Association for Machine Translation (EAMT),
Alicante, Spain.

Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel J. Mankowitz, and Todd
Hester. 2019.
Challenges of real-world reinforce-
ment learning. CoRR, abs/1904.12901.

John Langford, Alexander Strehl, and Jennifer Wort-
man. 2008.
Exploration scavenging.
In Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), Helsinki, Finland.

Keith Godwin and Paul Piwek. 2016. Collecting reli-
able human judgements on machine-generated lan-
guage: The case of the QG-STEC data. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Natural Language Gen-
eration conference (INLG), Edinburgh, UK.

Carolin Lawrence, Pratik Gajane, and Stefan Riezler.
2017a. Counterfactual Learning for Machine Trans-
lation: Degeneracies and Solutions. In Proceedings
of the NIPS WhatIf Workshop, Long Beach, Califor-
nia, USA.

Braden Hancock, Antoine Bordes, Pierre-Emmanuel
Mazar´e, and Jason Weston. 2019.
Learning from
dialogue after deployment: Feed yourself, chatbot!

Alexander Hans, Daniel Schneegaß, Anton Maximilian
Sch¨afer, and Steffen Udluft. 2008. Safe exploration
for reinforcement learning. In ESANN, pages 143–
148.

Carolin Lawrence and Stefan Riezler. 2018. Improving
a Neural Semantic Parser by Counterfactual Learn-
ing from Human Bandit Feedback. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), Melbourne, Aus-
tralia.

Ji He, Jianshu Chen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li-
hong Li, Li Deng, and Mari Ostendorf. 2016. Deep
reinforcement learning with a natural language ac-
tion space. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), Berlin, Germany.

Carolin Lawrence, Artem Sokolov, and Stefan Riezler.
2017b. Counterfactual Learning from Bandit Feed-
back under Deterministic Logging : A Case Study in
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Natasha Jaques, Asma Ghandeharioun, Judy Hanwen
Shen, Craig Ferguson, Agata Lapedriza, Noah Jones,
Shixiang Gu, and Rosalind Picard. 2020. Way of-
f-policy batch deep reinforcementlearning of human
preferences in dialog.

Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky,
Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2016. Deep re-
inforcement learning for dialogue generation.
In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. 2016. Doubly robust off-pol-
icy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), New York, NY.

Khanh Nguyen, Hal Daum´e III, and Jordan Boyd-
Graber. 2017.
Reinforcement learning for bandit
neural machine translation with simulated human
feedback. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP).

Philip S. Thomas and Emma Brunskill. 2016. Data–
efﬁcient off-policy policy evaluation for reinforce-
ment learning.
In Proceedings of the 33nd Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
New York, NY.

Rodrigo
Nogueira
and
Kyunghyun
Cho.
2017.
Task-oriented
query
reformulation
with
rein-
forcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language
Processing
(EMNLP),
Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Louis Leon Thurstone. 1927. A law of comparative
judgement. Psychological Review, 34:278–286.

Gaurav Trivedi, Esmaeel R Dadashzadeh, Robert M
Handzel, Wendy W Chapman, Shyam Visweswaran,
and Harry Hochheiser. 2019.
Interactive NLP
in clinical care: Identifying incidental ﬁndings in
radiology reports.
Applied clinical informatics,
10(4):655.

Bo Pang, Erik Nijkamp, Wenjuan Han, Linqi Zhou,
Yixian Liu, and Kewei Tu. 2020. Towards holistic
and automatic evaluation of open-domain dialogue
generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), Online.

Joseph P Turian, Luke Shea, and I Dan Melamed. 2003.

Evaluation of machine translation and its evaluation.
Proceedings of MT Summit, pages 386–393.

Doina Precup, Richard S. Sutton, and Satinder P. Singh.
2000. Eligibility traces for off-policy policy eval-
uation.
In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
San Francisco, CA.

Suzan Verberne, Emiel Krahmer, Iris Hendrickx,
Sander Wubben, and Antal van den Bosch. 2018.
Creating a reference data set for the summarization
of discussion forum threads. Language Resources
and Evaluation, 52(2):461–483.

Pablo Rivas, Kerstin Holzmayer, Cristian Hernandez,
and Charles Grippaldi. 2018. Excitement and con-
cerns about machine learning-based chatbots and
talkbots: A survey. In 2018 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Technology and Society (ISTAS), pages
156–162. IEEE.

Jingkang Wang, Yang Liu, and Bo Li. 2020.
Rein-
forcement learning with perturbed rewards. In AAAI,
New York, New York.

Li Zhou, Kevin Small, O. Rokhlenko, and C. Elkan.
2017.
End-to-end ofﬂine goal-oriented dialog
policy learning via policy gradient.
ArXiv,
abs/1712.02838.

Paul R. Rosenbaum and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. The
central role of the propensity score in observational
studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1).

Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B.
Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Chris-
tiano, and Geoffrey Irving. 2019. Fine-tuning lan-
guage models from human preferences.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.08593.

Artem Sokolov, Julia Kreutzer, Stefan Riezler, and
Christopher Lo. 2016.
Stochastic structured pre-
diction under bandit feedback.
In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
Barcelona, Spain.

Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M.
Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford,
Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. 2020. Learning
to summarize from human feedback.

Alexander L. Strehl, John Langford, Lihong Li, and
Sham M. Kakade. 2010.
Learning from logged
implicit exploration data.
In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Sytems (NIPS), Vancouver,
Canada.

Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. 2015. The
self-normalized estimator for counterfactual learn-
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), Montreal, Canada.