Xavier Franch, Daniel Mendez, Member, IEEE, Andreas Vogelsang, Member, IEEE,
Rogardt Heldal, Member, IEEE, Eric Knauss, Member, IEEE, Marc Oriol, Guilherme H. Travassos,
Jeffrey C. Carver, Senior Member, IEEE, Thomas Zimmermann, Senior Member, IEEE

I. INTRODUCTION

Abstract—Context: The relevance of Requirements Engineering
(RE) research to practitioners is vital for a long-term dissemina-
tion of research results to everyday practice. Some authors have
speculated about a mismatch between research and practice in
the RE discipline. However, there is not much evidence to support
or refute this perception. Objective: This paper presents the
results of a study aimed at gathering evidence from practitioners
about their perception of the relevance of RE research and
at understanding the factors that inﬂuence that perception.
Method: We conducted a questionnaire-based survey of industry
practitioners with expertise in RE. The participants rated the
perceived relevance of 435 scientiﬁc papers presented at ﬁve top
RE-related conferences. Results: The 153 participants provided
a total of 2,164 ratings. The practitioners rated RE research
as essential or worthwhile in a majority of cases. However, the
percentage of non-positive ratings is still higher than we would
like. Among the factors that affect the perception of relevance
are the research’s links to industry, the research method used,
and respondents’ roles. The reasons for positive perceptions
were primarily related to the relevance of the problem and
the soundness of the solution, while the causes for negative
perceptions were more varied. The respondents also provided
suggestions for future research, including topics researchers
have studied for decades, like elicitation or requirement quality
criteria. Conclusions: The study is valuable for both researchers
and practitioners. Researchers can use the reasons respondents
gave for positive and negative perceptions and the suggested
research topics to help make their research more appealing
to practitioners and thus more prone to industry adoption.
Practitioners can beneﬁt from the overall view of contemporary
RE research by learning about research topics that they may
not be familiar with, and compare their perception with those
of their colleagues to self-assess their positioning towards more
academic research.

arXiv:2011.05106v2 [cs.SE] 3 Dec 2020

Software engineering (SE) research, in particular applied
SE research, has a unique symbiotic relationship between
theoretical and practical knowledge. Hence, in SE, either
considered as a whole or in its speciﬁc activities, we need
an ongoing discussion about the alignment between the theo-
retical contributions of researchers and practical problems.
While researchers have recently evaluated this alignment
within SE research as a whole [21] and empirical SE re-
search [7], there is no such evaluation within requirements
engineering (RE) research. This knowledge gap is particularly
concerning because of the doubts about the practical relevance
of RE over the years. These doubts are fueled, for example,
by the uniqueness of some types of systems, like open-source-
based [1] or commercial-off-the-shelf-based [8], the perva-
siveness of agile development approaches, and the increasing
popularity of data-driven decision making1. For instance, agile
approaches encourage practitioners to reduce irrelevant docu-
mentation and improve knowledge management practices [15],
which are frequently at odds with more traditional RE [31].
Given their biases towards the importance of the topics they
have studied for years, it is often very difﬁcult for researchers
to judge the practical relevance of their own research.
Therefore, this paper addresses the gap through an empir-
ical study. Using a questionnaire-based survey, we gathered
practitioners’ perception of the relevance of the RE research
embodied in a sample of 435 RE papers published in major
conferences. Based on 2,164 ratings from 153 respondents, we
answer the following questions:

Index Terms—Requirements Engineering, Survey, Impact of
Research, Practitioners’ Perception.

• How do practitioners perceive the relevance of RE re-
search? We present an overview of the perceived rele-
vance and discuss how the relevance differs depending
on the role of the practitioner or the age of the paper.

• What contextual factors inﬂuence this perception? We
investigate the impact of paper types, research methods,
the afﬁliations of authors, and general topics on the
perceived relevance.

• What guidance can be given for maximizing the relevance
of future RE research? We provide the reasons given by
practitioners for their ratings and an analysis of the topics
that they suggest for future research.

In addition to exploring the relevance of RE research, we
reﬂect on factors that inﬂuence practitioners’ perception of

III. STUDY DESIGN

This section overviews the study design. Our replication
package, which is an open dataset and open materials, pro-
vides the complete protocol, the datasets, and the analysis
instrumentation [10].

II. BACKGROUND

A. Research Objective, Questions and Approach

The goal of this study is to assess the practical relevance
of RE research as perceived by practitioners. To address this
goal, we developed the research questions in Table I.

TABLE I
RESEARCH QUESTIONS OF THE STUDY

ID
Text

RQ 1
How do practitioners perceive the relevance of RE research?

RQ 2
Which properties of RE research inﬂuence perceptions?

RQ 3
What reasons do practitioners give to justify their perceptions
of relevance?
RQ 3.1
What reasons do practitioners give to justify their positive
perceptions of relevance?
RQ 3.2
What reasons do practitioners give to justify their negative
perceptions of relevance?
RQ 4
Which research problems should the RE research community
address according to practitioners?

B. Team

We composed a team of researchers that meet the following
criteria:

• have different backgrounds and experiences to ensure the
study design and execution are richer and less prone to
bias;

• allow for distribution of tasks in the data preparation and
collection, e.g. emerging from the paper summarization,
while increasing the validity by having the ability to
cross-check the analysis results among the team;

TABLE III
PAPER PER VENUE

Venue
Papers
Industry Papers
Ratings (all)
Ratings (industry)

• transfer authors’ experiences from similar studies on
relevance to practitioners [7], [21], and on RE-related
topics, including NaPiRE [25] and NFR4MDD [2]; and

IEEE RE
245
92 (37.6%)
1237
452 (36.5%)
REFSQ
113
28 (24.8%)
540
125 (23.1%)
ICSE
39
7 (17.9%)
195
31 (15.9%)
ESEM
22
9 (40.9%)
121
51 (42.1%)
ESEC/FSE; FSE
16
3 (18.8%)
71
17 (23.9%)
Total
435
139 (32.0%)
2164
676 (31.2%)

• gain access to a wider network of practitioners.
Following previous work on authors’ attribution and contri-
bution [6], Table II summarizes the roles of the team members.
We provide additional details in the prior publication [9].

Third, we had to decide what information to present to
practitioners to make their evaluation of relevance. We be-
lieved that requiring respondents to read full papers would
have resulted in very few (if any) responses. Therefore, we
used paper summaries, following the example of previous
studies [21], [7]. While we could have used the paper abstracts
as the summary, our analysis of the abstracts identiﬁed too
much variation in quality, style, and length. A previous study
showed these types of variations could affect the perception of
relevance [7]. Therefore, to ensure consistency, we decided to
write the summaries ourselves, using the following template :

TABLE II
AUTHORSHIP DETAILS: ROLES AND CONTRIBUTION (ALPHABETICAL
ORDER). ’S’ STANDS FOR SUPPORT OR DISCUSSION ROLE.

T. Zimmermann

G.H. Travassos

A. Vogelsang

D. Mendez

X. Franch

R. Heldal

J. Carver

E. Knaus

M. Oriol

Contribution

Conceptualisation
X
X
Administration
X
X
X
Instrument Design
X
X
Instrument Review
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Paper Summaries
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Validation of Summaries
X
X
X
X
X
X
Survey Implementation
X
Survey Validation
X
X
X
X
Scripts Development
X
Coding
X
X
X
Quantitative Analysis
X
X
X
X
S
X
Qualitative Analysis
X
S
S
Writing - Draft
S
X
S
S
X
S
X
Writing - Review & Editing
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

A [type of work] for [purpose of the work] in order
to [expected beneﬁt from the work from a practical
point of view]
For example:

“An experiment with students for comparing two
requirements elicitation techniques when instantiat-
ing software product lines (SPL) in order to under-
stand which approach is more suitable for eliciting
requirements in SPL” [P196]3.
All information on the included publications is available in
our replication package [10].
While we attempted to use the template for all summaries,
we did not rigidly enforce use of the template because for
some papers (e.g., for literature reviews) it was difﬁcult, if not

C. Dataset

• Authors’ networks: explicit invitations to industrial part-
ners from across the world, either as participants or to
help with dissemination of the survey in their networks.

• General Dissemination: via social media such as Twitter.

F. Data analysis

We compute several statistics to characterize the overall
perception practitioners have about RE research. Following the
measures used in previous studies [5], [21], who justiﬁed their
choice according to Kitchenham and Pﬂeeger’s recommenda-
tions [20] (see [5] for details), we calculate the proportion
of Essential (best response), Essential or Worthwhile (positive
feedback), and Unwise (worst response) ratings. These metrics
recognise Unimportant responses as neutral responses that do
not require the same level of analysis as the others.
More formally, let E, W, Ui, and Uw denote the number
of Essential, Worthwhile, Unimportant, and Unwise ratings
received:

D. Instrument
We conducted the survey using an online questionnaire
(available in our replication package [10]) to enable us to
reach a wide community of practitioners across the globe. In
addition, because the survey asked for critical feedback on
research, we made the questionnaire anonymous.
In a quest for simplicity, we designed the questionnaire with
three primary questions:

1) First, the questionnaire presented the respondent with
15 randomly chosen paper summaries. The respondents
provided their opinion on the importance of the research
described in each summary using a 4-point rating scale:
Unwise, Unimportant, Worthwhile, or Essential. This
asymmetric survey response scale is inspired by the Kano
model [19] and used by previous similar studies [21], [7]
making it easier to compare results. Respondents could
leave a summary unrated if they could not judge the
relevance of the research or if they did not have an
opinion. The responses to this question help answer RQ1
and RQ2.
2) Then, the questionnaire presented the respondent with
one of their highest-ranked summaries and one of their
lowest-ranked summaries and asked them to provide a
brief explanation for the ratings. The responses to this
question are used to answer RQ3.
3) Finally, the questionnaire asked the respondents to de-
scribe problems they faced in their work that could beneﬁt
from research. The responses to this question are used to
answer RQ4.
The questionnaire also gathered the following demographics:

• E-score: The percentage of ratings that are Essential:
E-score = E/(E + W + Ui + Uw)

• EW-score: The percentage of ratings that are Essential or
Worthwhile: EW -score = (E+W)/(E+W +Ui +Uw)

• U-Score: The percentage of ratings that are Unwise:
U -score = Uw/(E + W + Ui + Uw)
We then can compute these statistics for different groups of
respondents or summaries, e.g., all ratings, ratings by certain
demographics, ratings for speciﬁc conferences, or ratings for
category of papers.

IV. CODING

This section describes our coding process for the natural
language responses. We had to perform coding to classify
research topics (Section IV-A) and to categorize the free text
responses (Section IV-B).

A. Classiﬁcation of Research Topics

• Position: main role and level of engagement in RE duties
(responsible, contributor, user of requirements, or none).

Our focus was to analyze the topics described in the
summaries and their underlying papers. For a couple of
reasons, our goal was not to analyze the perceived relevance of
individual research contributions. First, from a methodological
point of view, the number of ratings for each summary is
rather small (median of ﬁve). Second, our interest is to identify
overall perception and trending topics rather than speciﬁc
research topics. Therefore, we assess the relevance of research
topics by aggregating ratings from multiple summaries about
similar topics.
Instead of working top-down from an existing body of
knowledge (e.g., SWEBOK), we worked bottom-up from
the respondents’ answers. Therefore, we applied inductive
coding to create a list of RE topics well-suited for the
responses gathered in the study (Table IV). The list deﬁnes
four top-level categories, of which two have subcategories.
Each category contains a list of topics. Though coding was

• Background: working experience (in years) and academic
degree (in computer science-related ﬁeld or not).

• Context: industry sector, size of the team, and country.

• Projects: type of software typically developed (e.g., em-
bedded, information systems).
The questionnaire concluded with a free text ﬁeld where
respondents could provide any further comments. However,
this question did not provide any useful information..

E. Participants
We used the following channels to recruit participants:

• RE Community e-mail Lists: REonline4, contacts coming
from previous studies such as NaPiRE5 [25], and regional
lists such as dist-jisbd6 (Spain).

V. RESULTS

We structure the results around the RQs. Then, Section VI
provides analysis and discussion of these results.

A. Overview of Responses

We received responses from 154 practitioners. Because we
relied on open mailing lists, we cannot calculate the response
rate. The respondents provided a total of 2,164 ratings. A large
share of the respondents (73.4%, 113 individuals) rated all 15
summaries presented to them. Only 4.6% (7 respondents) rated
less than 13 summaries. The lowest number of ratings given
by a participant was 5.
For each summary, we computed the consensus, i.e. the
level of agreement, based on the formula by Tastle and
Wierman [28], depicted in equation (1).

n
X


(1)


1 −|Xi −µX|

Consensus(X) = 1 +

i=1
pi log2

dX

where:

• n is the number of rating categories. In our case, n = 4
(i.e. Unwise, Unimportant, Worthwhile, Essential).

• pi is the percentage of respondents who considered the
summary to be in the ith rating category.

B. Coding of Free Text

• Xi is the numeric value of the ith rating category. In our
case, from 1 to 4.

• µX is the mean of the ratings given by the respondents
for the summary.

• dX is the width of X, that is, Xmax −Xmin. In our case,
dX = 3.
This process led to 429 consensus values (one per rated
summary8) ranging from 0 (complete disagreement) to 1

Challenge
Documentation
Subject matter
Phase

Requirements
quality
People
Process
First level
Second level
Third level

general
collaboration
automation
general
goals
elicitation
completeness
communication
decision making
business model
functional
documentation
consistency
skills
formalization
goal model
quality ⇒
generic
V & V
feasibility
subjectivity
prioritization
feature model
architecture
reliability
negotiation
traceability
creativity
standardization
state machine
tests
performance &
management
unambiguousness
other
visualization
UML diagram
process
efﬁciency
understandability
reuse
natural language
feature
usability
necessity
quality assurance
use case
risk
security
veriﬁability
execution
user story
other
compatibility
uncertainty
evolution
scenarios
maintainability
other
modeling
prototype
portability
safety
conﬁguration
rules
other
⇒
dependability
other
review report
sustainability
other
privacy
legal & regulations

TABLE V
RESOLUTION SCHEME

Rule
Rater 1
Rater 2
Rater 3
Decision
Applied

C1
none
none
none
none
57.4%
C2
X
none
none
none
11.1%
C3
X
Y
none
none
2.2%
C4
X
Y
Z
none
1.1%
C5
X
X
Y
X
5.4%
C6
X
X
none
X
6.2%
C7
X
X
X
X
16.7%

(complete agreement). Fig. 1 depicts the distribution of these
values. The average consensus among respondents’ ratings was
0.69. For example, a summary receiving one unimportant, ﬁve
worthwhile, and four essential ratings has a consensus value of
0.69. To determine whether the number of ratings is correlated
with the consensus value, we calculated the Spearman rank
correlation (because both values are not normally distributed).
There is a statistically signiﬁcant correlation (p-value ¡ 0.001),
but the correlation is weak (rho is -0.16). In other words, the
number of ratings has little, if any, inﬂuence on the consensus
value. The source data for the calculations can also be found
in our replication package [10].

Fig. 1. Consensus between respondents regarding the ratings

Business Analyst. The other roles are more distributed, with
a good number (30; 19.5%) working in roles not in the given
list, such as consultant, marketing person, or systems engineer.
Independent of their role, 101 respondents (65.6%) stated they
were responsible for RE tasks, 83 (53.9%) actively contributed
to RE tasks, and 58 were consumers of requirements (37.7%).
The number of respondents in each level includes the number
of respondents in the previous level.

B. Demographics

n = 15

Process Designer

Essential

n = 150

Tester / Test Manager

Worthwhile

Rating

n = 70

Researcher

Unimportant

n = 140

Developer

Unwise

n = 45

Multiple Roles

0
250
500
750
1000
Number of Ratings

n = 113

Product Owner

n = 223

Architect

Fig. 2. Overall Perception of RE research relevance.

Role

n = 235

Project Manager

n = 319

2010

n = 45

Other

n = 262

2011

n = 435

Business Analyst

n = 274

2012

n = 532

Requirements Engineer

Year

n = 358

2013

n = 75

Manager

n = 365

2014

n = 42

Consultant

n = 245

2015

n = 15

Designer

n = 341

2016

n = 29

Coach

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Fig. 3. Perception of RE research relevance measured along the years of the
respective publications.

Fig. 4. Rating of relevance according to the respondents’ roles.

rated the summaries slightly more negative. However, this
result needs to be taken with caution given the low number of
coaches in our sample (only 29 ratings).

C. RQ 1: How do practitioners perceive the relevance of RE
research?

D. RQ 2: Which properties of RE research inﬂuence percep-
tions?

n = 1065

n = 540

Solution proposals

REFSQ

Method

n = 821

Empirical research

n = 1237

RE

Venue

n = 301

Discussions

n = 195

ICSE

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

n = 71

ESEC/FSE

n = 121

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

ESEM

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

Fig. 8. Overall ratings in dependency to the research method

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

n = 163

Professional Practitioners

Fig. 5. Perception of RE research relevance about the venue.

n = 154

Students

Subjects

n = 10

Academic Professionals

n = 405

Mixed

Affiliation

n = 1

Laypersons

n = 168

Industry

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

n = 1591

Academic

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Fig. 9. Overall ratings in dependency to involved subjects.

Fig. 6. Rating grouped by authors’ afﬁliation.

reviews (e.g., literature reviews), opinions/position state-
ments, or experience reports.

industry or mixed). Papers with only industry authors achieved
the highest ratio of Essential ratings.
In addition, Figure 7 shows the distribution of ratings
depending upon whether the paper appeared in an industry
track or a research track. The results show that respondents
perceive papers in an industry track as slightly more relevant
than papers in a research track.
3) Does the perception of the relevance of a paper depend
on the research method used to do the paper’s research?:
Figure 8 shows how the perception of relevance varies across
papers of the following types:

1) “Solution proposal” papers contain technical contribu-
tions in the form of methodologies, reference models, or
technologies.
2) “Empirical research” papers analyze –from an empirical
perspective– contemporary real-world phenomena via in-
terrogations (e.g., interviews), observational studies (e.g.,
case studies), or intervention studies (e.g., controlled
experiments).
3) “Discussion” papers provide philosophical elaborations,

n = 442

Industry Track

Track

n = 1722

Research Track

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Topic
Category
Nr. of papers
Nr. of ratings
E-score
EW-score
U-score

General requirements quality
Quality
8
37
0.43
0.89
0.00
Subjectivity
People
4
19
0.42
0.73
0.05
Scenarios
Documentation
5
26
0.38
0.80
0.03
Collaboration
People
15
83
0.33
0.75
0.04
User stories
Documentation
4
18
0.33
0.68
0.00

the perception that the solution followed the right approach,
e.g., “Terminology is essential for the interpretation of require-
ments” [P215;R35]. Other common codes correspond to the
following situations (see Table VIII for details):

critical (i.e., rated the related research as unwise). The topics
span several categories including: requirements quality, people
aspects, and speciﬁc documentation styles. While for some
topics, such as goal models and creativity, the high U-score
matches a low E and EW-scores, there are also cases where
a high U-score contrasted with a rather high EW score (e.g.,
the topics of use cases or necessity).

• The proposed solution seems plausible (“Correlating un-
derstanding of non-functional requirements to project
success would be of interest” [P128;R74]).

• Existing solutions are unsatisfactory (“Establishing and
maintaining trace-links is still cumbersome” [P2;R116]).

E. RQ3. What reasons do practitioners give for justifying their
perceptions of relevance?

• Unaware of the existence of any solution for the ad-
dressed problem (“If a method could help teams with
little knowledge and experience in dealing with security,
it would be extremely valuable” [P100;R57]).

To answer RQ3, we analyze the free-text answers respon-
dents gave to justify their most positive and most negative
ratings.
1) RQ 3.1 What reasons do practitioners give for justifying
their positives perception of relevance?: After removing three
invalid responses, we analyzed the justiﬁcations for positive
ratings from 119 out of the 154 respondents (77.3%), which
produced 204 code instances. Table VIII presents codes,
grouped by categories, resulting from the process described in
Section IV-B. Overall, respondents gave justiﬁcations related
primarily to Problem Relevance of the problem and the Util-
ity of the solution. Therefore, we created a category for each
of these justiﬁcations. We identiﬁed two other categories of
codes: (i) Impact - the possible consequences of the research
presented and (ii) Source - the respondent’s experience.
The Problem relevance and Utility categories had a similar
number of code instances. However, the number of respon-
dents who provided those code instances leans slightly towards
Problem relevance with 86 respondents to only 77 for the
code instances in Utility.
An interesting follow-up result is that 49 respondents pro-
vided justiﬁcations from both categories, e.g., “Ambiguities are
a critical source of issues. An automatic double check could
help” [P9;R110]9

• Existing solutions are intrinsically complex (“To translate
legal requirements into IT requirements needs a lot of
translating effort between specialists” [P224;R26]).

• The proposal is of interest for individuals (“Understand-
ing the applicability of commonly used techniques in
different contexts is always helpful as it sharpens the own
perception” [P44;R102]).

2) RQ 3.2 What reasons do practitioners give for justifying
their negative perception of relevance?: Of the 116 responses
to this question, we had to remove 19 that were not valid,
resulting in 97 respondents (63.0%). Table IX presents 17
emerging codes grouped into ﬁve categories. Some respon-
dents disagreed with a signiﬁcant aspect of the research, while
others were more concerned about the actual industrial need
or the difﬁculty of making the research actionable. In addition,
some respondents did not trust the proposal because they were
not convinced about some aspect related to its quality. Last, a
few respondents had concerns about whether the research was
actually about RE or about whether the research would have
industrial impact.
The most common negative justiﬁcation is lack of necessity,
followed closely by difﬁculty of applying and disagreement.
Contrary to the positive justiﬁcations, only a few responses
produced multiple codes (14 or 14.3%; in all the cases only
two codes).
In terms of individual codes, the four codes mentioned most
often were (see Table IX for details):

In terms of the number of instances, three codes dominated.
First, 40 code instances (19.6% of the total, issued by 33.6%
of respondents) justiﬁed the positive ratings in terms of their
general relevance to RE without further details, e.g., “non-
functional reqs have the biggest impact on architecture and
may not be left aside” [P22;R28]. Next, 31 code instances
(15.2%; 26.1%) referred also to relevance but in relation to in-
dustry, e.g., “Companies and businesses still use a high amount
of textual documents which can be used for RE purposes”
[P309;R76]. Third, 30 code instances (14.7%; 25.2%) reﬂect

• The respondent is in total disagreement with the research.
Usually, the response provides some explanation (“The
decision of which feature next is not based on uncertainty
but an economic or technical risk view” [P305;R95]).

Topic
Category
Nr. of papers
Nr. of ratings
E-score
EW-score
U-score

Use cases
Documentation
10
53
0.24
0.73
0.11
Negotiation
Phase
4
19
0.15
0.78
0.10
Necessity
Quality
3
10
0.20
0.80
0.10
Creativity
People
7
44
0.15
0.63
0.09
Goal model
Documentation
11
56
0.07
0.64
0.08

TABLE VIII
CODES FOR POSITIVE RATINGS

Code
Deﬁnition
Occurrences

Problem relevance
the respondent justiﬁes his positive rating in terms of the relevance of the problem
93
general
the problem is of interest per se, without reference to the relevance to industry
40
industry
the problem is of interest for practitioners
31
contextual
the problem is of interest for some area, development method, etc.
9
organizational
the problem is of interest for the organization of the respondent
8
personal
the problem is of personal interest for the individual respondent
5

Utility
the respondent justiﬁes his positive rating in terms of the utility of the solution
89
adequate
the respondent is conﬁdent that the solution presented to the problem follows the right approach
30
plausible
the respondent considers that the solution presented to the problem may work (but s/he is not sure; this
is the difference with the former)
17

unsatisfactory
the respondent considers that existing solutions are not satisfactory for some reason (not efﬁcient,
inaccurate, ...)
15

not existing
the respondent is not aware of any solution for the problem
12
complex
the respondent considers that any solution to the problem is intrinsically difﬁcult
10
scarce
the respondent reports that there are very few existing solutions to the problem
5

Impact
the respondent justiﬁes his positive rating in terms of the possible consequences of the research
16
on individual
the respondent informs that the research reported would beneﬁt himself (e.g., knowledge, skills, . . . )
10
on organization
the respondent argues that the research reported would beneﬁt the dynamics of the organization
6

Source
the respondent informs about the source of his rating
6
experience
the respondent sustains his positive rating because of his experience
6

TABLE IX
CODES FOR NEGATIVE RATINGS

Code
Deﬁnition
Occurrences

Unnecessary
the respondent justiﬁes the negative rating by the low impact of the work
35
not needed - universal
the respondent thinks that the research is not of interest for the industry in general
15
not needed - contextual
the respondent thinks that the research does not solve an industrial need in his/her speciﬁc context
12
not interesting
the respondent does not question the work but simply considers it as not interesting
6
old fashioned
the respondent thinks that the work is not essential for industry anymore (could have been in the
past)
2

Difﬁcult to apply
the respondent justiﬁes the negative rating by the difﬁculty to apply the work
31
too speciﬁc
the respondent thinks the work can only be applied under very speciﬁc conditions
11
not realistic
the respondent questions the practical applicability of the approach, possibly pointing out some
aspect disregarded in the paper
8

too complicated
the respondent thinks the approach is too complicated to apply in reality (e.g., diversity of
contexts)
6

not efﬁcient
the respondent questions the efﬁciency of the approach (even if the approach looks sound)
5
too subjective
the respondent thinks that the research is too subjective
1

Disagreement
the respondent justiﬁes the negative rating by disagreeing with the work
26
not agreed
the respondent disagrees with the research approach or the research hypothesis presented in the
paper (strong disagreement)
18

not convinced
the respondent is not convinced by the research approach or the research hypothesis presented
in the paper (weak disagreement)
8

Low quality
the respondent justiﬁes the negative rating by the poor quality of the work
13
weak evidence
the respondent is not convinced by the data and/or population that supports the research (quantity,
procedure, proﬁle, ...)
5

not state of the art
the respondent thinks that other approaches exist addressing the same problem
4
too vague
the respondent understands the approach but misses a more thorough description in order to
understand its applicability.
3

not solid
the respondent thinks the research lacks substance (questions the solidity of the work)
1

Category
Codes
Occurrences

Phase
Elicitation (19), Documentation (13),
Validation (8), Analysis (6), Manage-
ment (4), Prioritization (2), Negotia-
tion (1), Veriﬁcation (1)

54

• The proposal is too speciﬁc and thus difﬁcult to general-
ize (“This only applies to a small (signiﬁcant) sector of
BAs” [P394;R17]).
Note that many responses provide less detail than the ones
listed above and express a short negative justiﬁcation, e.g., “It
does not make sense for me”) [P127;R120] or “Not interesting
for my working environment” [P380;R66].

47

Process activities
Traceability (9), Automation (8), Evo-
lution (8), Derivation (6), Reuse (4),
Modeling (3), Domain analysis (3), For-
mal reasoning (3), System scoping (3),
Visualization (2)

45

Specialized topics
Requirements quality criteria (8), RE
fundamentals (7), NL requirements (7),
NFRs
(7),
Context-aware
RE
(7),
Formal requirements (5), Data-driven
RE (4)

F. RQ4 Which research problems should the RE research
community address according to the practitioners?

After discarding four invalid/empty responses, we split the
99 remaining (64.3%) into 173 statements. We removed 16
statements that were comments and not actual suggestions,
resulting in 157 suggestions.
We considered using the topic taxonomy from RQ2.4 to
classify these suggestions. However, we decided against this
option because we did not want to force the suggestions into
the rigid pre-deﬁned research topic structure. As expected, the
analysis conﬁrmed some misalignment between the existing
research topics and the provided suggestions.
Table X presents the 45 codes that emerged from the coding
process, grouped into seven categories:

Transversal areas
RE process (11), General aspects of
RE (10), RE tools (6), RE and stan-
dards (4), RE education (1)

32

RE and people
RE in the organization (12), Human
factors (9), Human in the loop (6), RE
in teams (3), RE roles (2)

32

RE in practice
RE efﬁciency (10), Cost impact (4), RE
at scale (3), RE effectiveness (1)
18

Links
RE
and
organization
(7),
RE
and
code (3), RE and architecture (2), RE
and testing (2), RE and technology (1),
RE outside CS (1)

16

• Process activities. Similar to the paper topics, these
statements focus on speciﬁc RE process-related activities.
Some codes appear both here and in the topics category
(RQ2.4), while some emerged only here (e.g., system
scoping), and some appear only in the paper topics (e.g.,
decision-making).

clusters of statements: the most suggested categories (Phase,
Process activities, and Specialized topics), medium categories
(Transversal areas and RE and People), and less suggested
categories (RE in practice and Links).
It is also worth noting that some codes emerged from the
analysis of the suggestions. For example, some respondents
explicitly mentioned the importance of the Elicitation phase
(“Review effectiveness of Agile methods as compared with
traditional methods in the accuracy of requirements elicitation”
[R101]) while others mentioned it more implicitly (“how to
conduct an interview with a customer” [R43]).
Two last remarks on the information gathered:

• Links. These statements correspond to the need to explore
the links among RE and other software engineering
activities or artifacts, or even links beyond software
engineering.

• Phase. These statements focus on research about one
particular RE phase. We used a slightly ﬁner granularity
than in RQ2.4, due to our inductive coding approach.

• RE and people. These statements are highly related to
human aspects of RE, like the consideration of RE in the
organization or putting the human in the loop.

• The respondents put 19 suggestions (12.2%) explicitly
into context, the majority of them (14) referring to
suggestions in agile development, e.g., “How to convince
practitioners that agile does not imply the absence of
requirements” [R76]. None of the other contexts (e.g.,
“how to capture and represent ideas regarding innovation
projects” [R121]) was recurrent.

• RE in practice. These statements are directly related to
practical aspects as RE at scale and efﬁciency of the RE
process.

• Specialized. These statements are highly related to RE,
like natural language requirements or data-driven RE.

• Furthermore, 13 suggestions (8.3%) contained some type
of implicit or explicit general criticism to researchers,
e.g., “Get researcher(s) embedded with real-life sys-
tem engineering teams and uncover new research areas”
[R44]. We provide more details in Section VI-A.

VI. ANALYSIS

In general, the results for RQ1 (Section V-C) show the
majority of the respondents give favourable ratings for the
papers. However, we would have liked to have seen more
Essential ratings for papers in our chosen venues. These are
the conferences that shall lead RE research forward in the
times where agile values play an increasingly vital role and
the importance of requirements may become increasingly less
evident.
The declining interest over the years is worthy of comment.
This decline could be due to the overspecialization of papers,
which are more focused on challenging research topics rather
than on solving real challenges in society and industry. Con-
versely, the decline may simply point out an adoption gap,
suggesting that it takes time for industry to adopt research
results.
When examining the effect of participant’s role we see some
differences. On the more critical side, coaches ﬁnd many of the
papers Unimportant or Unwise. If one assumes that coaches,
in particular, should know what works and does not work in an
industrial setting, then their negative perception is particularly
concerning. In addition, the respondents who work with or are
inﬂuenced by real requirements are less favorable towards RE
research. These include: designers, who are directly dependent
on the requirements; consultants, who view requirements as
an essential part of contracts; managers, who need to have
an overall overview the product; requirement engineers and
business analysts, who produce requirements; architects, who,
like designers, depend on excellent requirements and some-
times write their own requirements. Negative ratings from
these participants could result from the perception that much
of the published RE work does not relate directly to their
biggest practical challenges.
Conversely, ratings from industrial researchers are more
positive. We expect researchers are most familiar with the RE
literature, but not necessarily with how the research results
apply in day-to-day work, which might explain their more
positive views.
Similarly, we notice very positive views from respondents
in roles that have some distance from day-to-day RE work,
such as process designer (highest EW-score) and multiple roles
(highest E-score). An explanation for this result might be the
huge breadth of RE research. Only people in roles that have a
broad overview of the company can appreciate a large range of
topics, while those that have more speciﬁc roles have a higher
chance of encountering RE research that does not relate to
their particular area.
Finally, testers and test managers stick out as groups with
the most favorable perception of RE research. A possible
explanation is that these testers would beneﬁt from the value
new practices would bring, without being subjected to any
additional workload. In addition, they might agree most with
the need to improve or change RE in practice.

B. Factors inﬂuencing perception (RQ2)

n = 139

Ind. Authors / Ind. Track

n = 205

Mixed Authors / Res. Track

Authors and Track

n = 200

Mixed Authors / Ind. Track

n = 103

Acad. Authors / Ind. Track

n = 29

Ind. Authors / Res. Track

n = 1488

Acad. Authors / Res. Track

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rating (%)

• Justiﬁcations with a potential impact on current practices
prevail over research that is more speculative. In other
words, practitioners consider research especially valuable
when it proposes solutions that:
– do not yet exist in industry (“This problem is not
addressed in industry. However, almost everyone faces
the problem” [P31;R117]),
– exist but are scarce (“Systems (including vehicles) are
becoming more autonomous and adaptive, and there is
a lot to be done here” [P198;R5]), and
– exist but are difﬁcult to apply or unsatisfactory (“It’s
quite difﬁcult to specify unambiguous, de-idealized,
and measurable NFRs. We usually spend too much
time” [P304;R90]).
Some additional observations from the data include:

Rating
Essential
Worthwhile
Unimportant
Unwise

Fig. 10. Ratings grouped by author afﬁliation and submission track

valuable, likely because of their wider claims and perceived
applicability appeals to participants. Conversely, technology
and controlled experiments are likely too narrow to appeal to
a broad audience. Respondents did not appreciate discussion
papers, especially based on the percentage of Essential ratings.
In particular, Discussion papers are the most controversial in
terms of perception (high U-score). A reason for their low
score could be the lack of appealing titles and abstracts.
4) Research topics: We found differences in the focus
between academia and industry. For example, goal models
and creativity studies are popular RE research areas but are
less relevant to the respondents. Practitioners likely tend to
appreciate the daily challenges they face, such as requirements
quality, human aspects, and documentation styles.

• There is a champion among the respondents for every
research topic identiﬁed in this study. Respondents refer
to general activities or techniques, such as (“prioritiz-
ing requirements is one of the most challenging tasks
for REs” [P330;R37]) or (“Traceability in safety-critical
systems is THE important [thing]” [R124;P114]), but
also to detailed issues such as “Aligning requirements
to regulatory standards is extremely important in many
industry” [P2;R116] and “dependency between require-
ments is always crucial” [P126;R56], and general RE
skills (“I think that communication, in general, is a
success factor of a project; good communication drives
to the right goals” [P105;R124]).

C. Reasons given by practitioners for justifying their percep-
tions of relevance (RQ3)

In this section, we separately discuss the reasons for posi-
tive perceptions and negative perceptions, based both on the
quantitative results presented in Section V-E (Table VIII and
Table IX) and the quotes extracted from the responses (fully
available in the replication package).
1) Reasons for positive perception: It is interesting to note
that respondents mentioned problem relevance and solution
utility as the reason for positive perceptions with similar
frequency, with a slight tendency towards problem relevance.
In fact, many respondents (41.2%) gave both reasons as part
of their justiﬁcation. This observation supports the intuitive
belief that for impactful research, a paper has to have both an
interesting problem and a plausible solution. Still, the strongest
opinions have to be with the importance of the problem, espe-
cially when it comes to importance in the industry (“relevant
in daily project-life” [P98;R86], “It is a problem practitioners
struggle with” [P407;R7]).
Examining these results in more detail reveals the most
common reasons, as follows:

• Respondents mention long-running, open RE debates. For
example, how much RE is enough (“Because of the
conﬂict between complete requirements and fast require-
ments” [P82;R81]) or agile vs. traditional approaches
(“There is a tension between RE rigour and agile; un-
derstanding how this might be addressed in practice is
critical for the future of RE” [P364;R123]).

• There are several reasons for criticizing solution utility.
An example of recurrent underlying reason respondents
give is: “interesting, but sounds too theoretical for real
project life” [P396;R92]. Similarly, some respondents
express concerns about the efﬁciency of the proposed
methods (“This seems overkill and the expected outcome
does not appear to be justifying the efforts” [P386;R32]).
Respondents also complain about excessively narrow
focus and give concrete advice to formulate more general
approaches (“spend your efforts on helping more BAs!”
[P394;R17]).

• The chosen research method is a reason for criticism.
Respondents referred to case studies (“it is limited to
a company, if it were a survey with many companies
it would have more validity” [P21;R37]), baseline data
(“using a small dataset does not sound interesting”
[P40;R135] and remarkably (4 respondents; 4.1%) the
use of students for experimentation (“Students do not yet
have the skills to contribute meaningfully” [P242;R71]).

• Some respondents criticized research others considered
positive. A remarkable example is non-functional require-
ments, which several respondents identiﬁed as impor-
tant (see the previous section) but others indicated it
was not deserving of research because “NFRs are not
that important after all and current prose-based methods
are sufﬁcient” [P304;R41]. Other examples exist, e.g.,
(“Traceability is not a high-priority activity in Require-
ments Engineering” [P358;R42]).

D. Research problems that the RE research community should
address (RQ4)

• Weak evidence (“do research with examples of reasonable
size; solutions that work only on toy example size are of
no beneﬁt” [R103]).

• Unaware of context (“Check, that the needed prerequisites
[of the proposed research] have a certain likelihood to
be fulﬁlled” [R103]; “They should ﬁrst understand the
context of my work area” [R150]).

A. Internal Validity
The context of RE. We contextualized RE as a subdiscipline
of SE. However, it is true that RE is multi-faceted and is
present in other contexts such as systems engineering and
business process management. We attempted not to impose
an SE-only viewpoint on our analysis and discussion, for
instance, collecting a signiﬁcant number of responses from
practitioners in roles that are closer to business than to SE
like manager or consultant (see Figure 4).
Use of papers. We used papers as the primary source of
information about RE research. Considering that we chose
papers from well-respected peer-reviewed conferences in RE,
the papers are a reasonable representation of RE research.
However, we could have adopted other strategies for answering
the research questions, for instance analyzing the practical
adoption of research outcomes in industry. A fundamental
difference among our approach and this alternative is that
in our research design, we could ask a practitioner about an
RE topic for which she has no practical experience, while in
the alternative approach, a practitioner would have responded
according to the RE-related methods she is effectively using in
her daily work. Whether this approach would have produced
similar results remains an open question.
Practitioners’ perception of research proposals. It was chal-
lenging and highly demanding to create summaries. We formu-
lated some general guidelines and shared the work among the
team. However, because the result was not entirely satisfactory
despite an internal pilot phase, we conducted another iteration
where a subset of authors was in charge of harmonizing
the summaries. During this process, we decided to create a
summary template as a reference (see Section III-C).
Categorization of practitioners’ opinions. We consistently
organized and interpreted the data collected from the partici-
pants. To support this process, we executed a pilot, involving
some members of the research team.

• Lack of applicability of research results (“Focus within
Software Engineering (Requirements Engineering) is on
a level that is far too high and abstract (frameworks,
philosophy, theory). The industry needs a toolbox with
techniques and practices that work” [R43]).

We also want to comment individually on some categories
identiﬁed in Section V-E:

• Respondents referred to the elicitation and documenta-
tion phases most often. They seldom mentioned other
phases like prioritization, negotiation, or veriﬁcation.
While some respondents gave very generic suggestions
(e.g., “Techniques for identifying unstated needs”), others
were more precise and mentioned topics as diverse as:
elicitation by interviews, dealing with tacit knowledge,
or how much documentation is enough. For more details,
we refer to our online dataset [10].

• Respondents also often mentioned the link between RE
and organization. Given that RE lies in the crossroads
of several disciplines, it is not surprising to ﬁnd links to
some of them. In particular, we found some responses
stressing the link with organizational aspects. Responses
may refer to general aspects of this link, i.e. in the Link
category (“Visualising requirements and business goals
and their interconnections” [R3]) or emphasize the human
factors of such connection (“Transition from research to
practice and the associated cost (overcoming management
resistance)” [R44]). Respondents do not seek links to
other SE activities like architecture or testing. This ob-
servation aligns with the very nature of RE, a discipline
that needs to be close to the organizational level.

• Three process activities excel over the others: traceability,
evolution, and automation. While these may not be sur-
prising, on the converse, respondents did not want topics
like modeling and formal reasoning or more speciﬁc
activities like visualization and system scoping.

Robustness of the protocol. This study reuses and evolves
research protocols previously executed and evaluated [2], [25].
We also performed some preparation [9], executed a pilot,
and included authors from the previous similar studies in this
replication. However, there is still a threat concerning the
topics addressed in the papers because the questionnaire does
not speciﬁcally address a single topic but overall summaries.
It is still reasonable to assume the topics primarily drive the
answers of our respondents.

Rating
RE
SE
ESE

Essential
24.2%
20.0%
17.6%
Worthwhile
46.3%
51.0%
48.8%
Unimportant
25.3%
25.6%
29.2%
Unwise
4.2%
3.4%
4.6%

should resonate with practitioners. This goal is the main
motivation of our work that addressed four research questions:

• RQ1: While respondents considered a majority of RE re-
search to be relevant, there was a non-negligible percent-
age that disagreed, showing that the research community
still has a challenge ahead.

D. External Validity

Representativity of RE research by the chosen venues. As
the primary source of information, we rely on papers from ﬁve
world-leading conferences related to RE and SE. Therefore,
we excluded other SE conferences where RE topics may
be present (e.g., ASE and XP). We also excluded general
conferences outside SE, like MODELS or CAiSE, which
could include RE-related papers. To partially mitigate this
exclusion, we argue that a subset of papers published in IEEE
RE and REFSQ present results related to areas other than
SE. We also excluded journal papers, which could describe
broader aspects and, thus, could have further strengthened
our results. The exclusion of journal papers is justiﬁed by
the timeliness and originality of conference papers, besides
reducing the complexity of the ﬁnal study by avoiding the
ﬁltering of extended versions and dealing with an excessive
amount of data. Additionally, we follow the pattern of one
of the previous studies similar to ours [21]. However, we are
aware that industry-relevant research can be published ﬁrst and
only in journals that can present substantially more evidence
and contain reﬁned analyses.
Representativity of RE research by the chosen period of time
Similarly, repeating the study could yield different results as
the perception of relevance is time-dependent. For example,
new topics could have momentum not present during this study
(e.g., RE for artiﬁcial intelligence). Mitigating this threat is
beyond our control and the intention is to provide an overall,
cross-sectional snapshot that can steer an important discussion.
Representativity of the industry by the respondents. We
intended to include opinions from a broad range of industry
participants who work with software requirements. As men-
tioned in Section V-B, the participants cover a wide range
of demographic characteristics, including different countries,
levels of experience, roles, team sizes, and industrial domains.
We used several channels to recruit participants to minimize
sample biases. However, we cannot claim that our sample is
representative in a statistical sense since it is practically im-
possible to characterize the entire population (all practitioners
working with requirements).

• RQ2: Of the context factors we explored, two had a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on perception. First, respondents
had a better perception of solution proposals and more
speciﬁcally, papers presenting reference models, and a
lower perception of discussion papers. Second, respon-
dents viewed empirical papers involving industrial prac-
titioners as more relevant than other papers, especially
those involving students.

• RQ3: Respondents justiﬁed positive opinions on re-
search because of problem relevance and solution utility.
Whereas, their negative opinions ranged from unnec-
essary research and difﬁculty to apply the proposed
solution, to disagreement with the approach and perceived
low quality.

VIII. DISCUSSION

IX. CONCLUSIONS
Research relevance has been studied for more than 50
years. Practice and research have been qualiﬁed as “poles
apart” [27]. Managers have been speculated to be from Mars
while academics from Venus [3]. Hoping these statements are
exaggerations, it is important to reﬂect on the practical rele-
vance of applied research disciplines, like RE. This reﬂection
is the purpose of this paper, a survey-based study involving 153
practitioners worldwide who rated research works published in
scientiﬁc papers in a way that allowed us provide an answer to
four research questions, as summarized in the previous section.
We argue that the results are valuable for both: researchers,
who learn about factors that can make their research more
relevant, and practitioners, who obtain an overall landscape
of the RE state of the art, and educators.
We would like to see replications of this study following
several directions. First, an update with research from 2017
onwards, which could uncover new trends about RE research
relevance. Second, answering the same research questions
with different research approaches, e.g. in-depth interviews
with practitioners or in-ﬁeld analysis of research adoption in
practice. Third, similar studies in other areas like testing or
software architecture. Aggregation of results would help to
validate the outcomes of this study, and could eventually drive
possible changes of attitude from practitioners. Overall, we
hope our research contributes to a culture where academic
researchers increasingly present their results in a way that
supports uptake in industry.

X. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank all participating survey respon-
dents, as well as C. Coupette for her support during the
elaboration of initial analysis scripts and ﬁrst interpretations
in earlier versions, and O. Dieste for his participation in the
elaboration of paper abstracts. X. Franch’s work was partially
supported by the Spanish project GENESIS TIN2016-79269-
R. D. Mendez’ work was partially supported by the KKS
foundation through the S.E.R.T. Research Proﬁle project at
Blekinge Institute of Technology. G.H. Travassos’ work is
partically supported by CNPq (grant 304234/2018-4).

REFERENCES