Neural ranking models for document retrieval

Mohamed Trabelsi1   · Zhiyu Chen1 · Brian D. Davison1 · Jeff Heflin1

Received: 8 February 2021 / Accepted: 2 October 2021
© The Author(s) 2021

Abstract
Ranking models are the main components of information retrieval systems. Several
approaches to ranking are based on traditional machine learning algorithms using a set of
hand-crafted features. Recently, researchers have leveraged deep learning models in infor-
mation retrieval. These models are trained end-to-end to extract features from the raw data
for ranking tasks, so that they overcome the limitations of hand-crafted features. A variety
of deep learning models have been proposed, and each model presents a set of neural net-
work components to extract features that are used for ranking. In this paper, we compare
the proposed models in the literature along different dimensions in order to understand the
major contributions and limitations of each model. In our discussion of the literature, we
analyze the promising neural components, and propose future research directions. We also
show the analogy between document retrieval and other retrieval tasks where the items to
be ranked are structured documents, answers, images and videos.

Keywords  Document retrieval · Learning to rank · Neural ranking models · Information
retrieval

1  Introduction

Recent advances in neural networks enable the improvement in the performance of mul-
tiple fields including computer vision, natural language processing, machine translation,
speech recognition, etc. The main neural components that led to the breakthrough in mul-
tiple fields are convolutional and recurrent neural networks. Information retrieval (IR) also
benefits from deep neural network models leading to state-of-the-art results in multiple
tasks.

*	 Mohamed Trabelsi


Zhiyu Chen


Brian D. Davison


Jeff Heflin


(2019) reviewed the learning strategies and the major architectures of neural ranking mod-
els. Lin et al. (2020) focused mainly on pretrained Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) for
text ranking, where they showed that a BERT-based multi-stage ranking model is a potential
choice for a tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency of a neural ranking model. Xu et al.
(2020b) reviewed deep learning models for matching in document retrieval and recommenda-
tion systems. The authors grouped the neural ranking models into two categories which are
representation learning and matching function learning. Compared to the survey of Xu et al.
(2020b), in addition to grouping neural ranking models into five categories based on the neu-
ral components and design (Sect. 6), we summarize multiple models based on nine features
that are frequently presented in the neural ranking models (Sect. 7). We also discuss the gen-
eralization of neural ranking models to other retrieval tasks with different objects to query and
rank. In particular, we describe four retrieval tasks which are: structured document retrieval,
Question-Answering, image retrieval, and Ad-hoc video search (Sect. 8).
In conclusion, the objective of our survey is to summarize the current progress, and com-
pare multiple neural architectures using different dimensions. Our comparison is more fine-
grained than existing surveys in terms of grouping and decomposing neural ranking models
into important neural components and architecture designs. In addition, our survey includes an
overview of models in the literature based on several features that are frequently presented in
neural ranking models. The detailed comparison of multiple neural ranking models can help
researchers to identify the common neural components that are used in the document retrieval
task, understand the main benefits from using a given neural component, and investigate the
promising neural components in future research to improve document retrieval results.
In summary, the content of this survey paper is organized as follows:

–	 In Sect. 2, we briefly introduce the deep learning terminologies and techniques to which
we refer when discussing the different neural ranking models in the literature.
–	 In Sect. 3, we introduce the document retrieval task, and present the flowchart of the neural
ranking based models for document retrieval.
–	 In Sect. 4, we formulate the document retrieval task using the LTR framework.
–	 In Sect. 5, we review the three LTR approaches used in ad-hoc retrieval namely, pointwise,
pairwise, and listwise approaches.
–	 In Sect. 6, we summarize the neural ranking models in ad-hoc retrieval, and we propose
placing the neural ranking models into five groups, where each group has unique neural
components and architectures.
–	 In Sect. 7, we discuss the features of neural ranking models, and propose nine features that
are frequently presented in neural ranking models. These features are used for an in-depth
overview of several neural ranking models that are proposed in the literature.
–	 In Sect. 8, we show that neural ranking models can generalize beyond document retrieval.
In particular, we describe four related retrieval tasks: structured document retrieval, ques-
tion-answering, image retrieval, and ad-hoc video search.
–	 In Sect. 9, we summarize the current best practices for the design of neural ranking mod-
els, and we discuss multiple research directions in document retrieval.

2  Background

In this section, we briefly introduce the deep learning terminology and techniques
most commonly used in ad-hoc retrieval. This includes Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) (LeCun & Bengio, 1998), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Elman, 1990),
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), Gated Recur-
rent Units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014), word embedding techniques (Wang et al., 2020),
attention mechanism (Bahdanau et  al., 2015), deep contextualized language models
(Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019), and knowledge graphs (Wang et al., 2017). We
will be referring to these neural components and techniques when discussing the differ-
ent neural ranking models in the literature.

2.1  Convolutional neural network (CNN)

A CNN (LeCun & Bengio, 1998) extracts features from data by defining a set of filters
or kernels that spatially connect local regions. Compared to the dense networks, each
neuron is connected to only a small number of neurons instead of being connected to
all neurons from the previous layer. This design significantly reduces the number of
parameters in the model. In addition, the weights in CNN filters are shared among mul-
tiple local regions for the input, and this further reduces the number of parameters. The
outputs of the CNN are called feature maps. Pooling operations, such as average and
max pooling, are usually applied to the feature map to keep only the significant signals,
and to further reduce the dimensionality. A CNN kernel has a predefined size so that
in order to handle the information in the border of the input, padding is introduced to
enlarge the input. CNNs were first introduced to solve image-related tasks such as image
classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al.,
2015; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2016), and were later adapted to solve text-
related tasks such as NLP and information retrieval (Collobert et al., 2011; Dai et al.,
2018; Hui et al., 2017; Jaech et al., 2017; Lan & Xu, 2018; McDonald et al., 2018; Pang
et al., 2016b; Tang & Yang, 2019; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014).

2.2  Recurrent neural network (RNN)

gradient. The new structures of LSTM and GRU allow the network to capture long-
range dependencies.

2.3  Long short‑term memory (LSTM)

Exploding and vanishing gradients during the training phase result in the failure of the
network to learn long-term dependencies in the input data. LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmid-
huber, 1997) was introduced to mitigate the effects of exploding and vanishing gradients.
LSTM differs from the vanilla RNN in the structure of the memory cell where three gates
are introduced to control the information in the memory cell. First, the input gate controls
the influence of the current input on the memory cell. Second, the forget gate controls the
previous information that should be forgotten in the current timestamp. Third, the output
gate controls the influence of the memory cell on the hidden state of the current timestamp.
Compared to RNN, LSTM has led to significant improvements in multiple fields with
sequential data such as text, video, and speech. LSTM has been applied to solve multiple
tasks including language modeling (Kim et al., 2016), text classification (Dai & Le, 2015),
machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014), video analysis (Singh et al., 2017), image cap-
tioning (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2017), and speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013).

2.4  Gated recurrent units (GRU)

Similar to LSTM, GRU (Cho et al., 2014) is used for sequence-based tasks to capture long-
term dependencies. However, unlike LSTM, GRU does not have separate memory cells.
In LSTM, the output gate is used to control the memory content that is used by other units
in the network. On the other hand, the GRU model does not contain an output gate, and
therefore uses its content without any gating control. In addition, while LSTM computes
the value of the new added memory independently of the forget gate, GRU does not inde-
pendently control the new added activation but uses the reset gate to control the previous
hidden state. More differences and similarities between LSTM and GRU are summarized
by Chung et al., (2014). This model has been shown to achieve good performance in multi-
ple tasks such as machine translation (Cho et al., 2014) and sentiment classification (Tang
et al., 2015) .

2.5  Attention mechanism

et al., 2016b), sentiment classification (Wang et al., 2017a), recommender systems (Ying
et al., 2018), speech recognition (Chan et al., 2016), and visual question answering (Lu
et al., 2016).

2.6  Word embedding

Words are embedded into low dimensional real-valued vectors based on the distributional
hypothesis (Harris, 1954). In many proposed models, the context is defined as the words
that precede and follow a given target word in a fixed window (Bengio et al., 2003; Mnih
& Hinton, 2007; Mikolov et al., 2013a; Pennington et al., 2014b). Mikolov et al., (2013b)
proposed the Skip-gram model which scales to a corpora with billions of words. These
pre-trained word embeddings are a key component in multiple models in neural language
understanding and information retrieval tasks. However, there are multiple challenges for
learning word embeddings. First, the embedding should capture the syntax and semantics
of tokens. Second, the embedding should model the polysemy characteristic where a given
word can have different meanings depending on the context. Multiple works have been pro-
posed to produce context-sensitive embeddings for tokens that capture not only the mean-
ing of a token, but also the contextual information of a token. Researchers have investi-
gated the use of RNN to produce context-dependent representations for tokens (Yang et al.,
2017; Ma & Hovy, 2016; Lample et al., 2016). The word embeddings are initialized using
pre-trained embeddings, then the parameters of RNN are learned using labeled data from
a given task. Peters et al., (2017) proposed a semi-supervised approach to train a context-
sensitive embedding using a neural language model pre-trained on a large and unlabeled
corpus. A forward and backward RNN are used to predict the next token so that the neural
language model encodes both the semantic and syntactic features of tokens in a context.
Adding pre-trained context-sensitive embeddings from both the forward and backward
RNN improves the performance of the sequence tagging task. However, the embeddings
are not deep, in the sense that they are not a function of all of the internal layers of both the
forward and background language models. Recently, researchers have focused on creating
deep context-sensitive embeddings such as ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) which are trained on large amounts of unlabeled data and achieve high perfor-
mance in multiple NLP tasks.

2.7  Deep contextualized language models

token in the input. BERT is trained on large collections of unlabeled data over two pre-
training tasks which are next sentence prediction and the masked language model. After
the pre-training phase, BERT can be used for downstream tasks on single text or text pairs
using special tokens ([SEP] and [CLS]) that are added into the input. For single text clas-
sification, [CLS] and [SEP] are added to the beginning and the end of the sequence, respec-
tively. For text pairs-based applications, BERT encodes the text pairs using bidirectional
cross attention between the two sentences. In this case, the text pair is concatenated using
[SEP], and then BERT treats the concatenated text as a single text. The sentence pair clas-
sification setting is used to solve multiple tasks in information retrieval including document
retrieval (Dai & Callan, 2019; Nogueira et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019a), passage re-rank-
ing (Nogueira & Cho, 2019), frequently asked question retrieval (Sakata et al., 2019), table
retrieval (Chen et al., 2020b), and semantic labeling (Trabelsi et al., 2020a). The single
sentence setting is used for text classification (Sun et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019). BERT
takes the final hidden state 퐡휃 of the first token [CLS] as the representation of the whole
input sequence, where 휃 denotes the parameters of BERT. Then, a simple softmax layer,
with parameters W, is added on top of BERT to predict the probability of a given label l:

(1)
p(l ∣퐡휃) = softmax(W퐡휃)

The parameters of BERT, denoted by 휃 , and the softmax layer parameters W are fine-tuned
by maximizing the log-probability of the true label.

2.8  Knowledge graphs

as entity classification and link prediction. More recently, Xu et al. (2020a) first construct
a product knowledge graph and then propose a self-attention-enhanced distributed repre-
sentation learning method with an efficient multi-task training schema to learn the graph
embeddings, which can improve the performance of downstream tasks such as search rank-
ing and recommendation. GNNs are also introduced in table retrieval, where Trabelsi et al.
(2020c) first construct a knowledge graph from table collections and then learn the graph
embeddings in order to rank tables.

3  Document retrieval

Information retrieval is a broad research area that covers a variety of content types and
tasks. In this survey, we focus on the document retrieval and ranking task and propose
detailed descriptions and groupings of multiple neural ranking models in the document
retrieval. In terms of scope, we focus on text-based document retrieval, where the input to
the neural ranking model is raw text, and the output is a ranked list of documents. There
are two advantages from retrieving documents using text-based neural ranking models.
First, the textual input form for the query and document can be used directly by the neural
ranking model, so that text-based ranking models generalize better than traditional hand-
crafted models which need specific features. Second, text-based ranking models provide
additional signals such as semantic and relevance matching signals to accurately predict
the relevance score.
Ranking and retrieving documents that are relevant to a user’s query is a classic infor-
mation retrieval task. Given a query, the ranking model outputs a ranked list of documents
so that the top ranked items should be more relevant to the user’s query. Search engines are
examples of systems that implement ad-hoc retrieval where the possible number of queries
that are continually submitted to the system is huge. The general flowchart of document
retrieval with neural ranking models is illustrated in Fig. 1. A large collection of docu-
ments is indexed for a fast retrieval. A user enters a text-based query which goes through a
query processing step consisting of a query reformulation and expansion (Azad & Deepak,
2019). Many neural ranking models have complex architectures, therefore computing the

Indexing

Unsupervised
ranking

Neural ranking component

Candidate
docs

Query
Query
Processing

Neural Ranking
Model

User
Return
Relevant docs

Relevant
docs

query-document relevance score using the neural ranking model for every document in
the initial large collection of documents leads to a significant increase in the latency for
obtaining a ranked list of documents from the user’s side. So, the neural ranking com-
ponent is usually used as a re-ranking step that takes two inputs which are the candidate
documents and the processed query. The candidate documents are obtained from an unsu-
pervised ranking stage, such as BM25, which takes as inputs the initial set of indexed doc-
uments and the processed query. During the unsupervised ranking, recall is more impor-
tant than precision to cover all possible relevant documents and forward a set of candidate
documents, that has both relevant and irrelevant documents, to the neural based re-ranking
stage. The output of the ranking model is a set of relevant documents to the user’s query
which are returned to the user in a particular order.
The inputs to neural ranking models consist of queries and documents with variable
lengths in which the ranking model usually faces a short query with keywords, and long
documents from different authors with a large vocabulary. Although exact matching is an
important signal in retrieval tasks, ranking models also need to semantically match queries
and documents in order to accommodate vocabulary mismatch. In ad-hoc retrieval, features
can be extracted from documents, queries, and document-query interactions. Some docu-
ment features go beyond text content and can include number of incoming links, page rank,
metadata, etc. A challenging scenario for a ranking model is to predict the relevance score
by only using the document’s textual content, because there is no guarantee to have addi-
tional features when ranking documents. Neural ranking models have been used to extract
feature representations for query and document using text data. For example, a deep neural
network model can be used to map the query and documents to feature vectors indepen-
dently, and then a relevance score is calculated using the extracted features. For query-
document interaction, classic information retrieval models like BM25 can be considered
as a query-document feature. For neural ranking models with a textual input for query and
document, features are extracted from the local interactions between query and document.

4  Task formulation

The function fw is trained by minimizing a loss function L(w). In LTR, the learning
categories are grouped into three groups based on their training objectives: the pointwise,
pairwise, and listwise approaches. In the next section, we will briefly describe these three
learning categories.
In general, fw is considered as the composition of two functions M and F, with F is a
feature extractor function, and M is a ranking model. So for a given query-document pair
(qi, di
j) , zi
j is given by:

(2)
zi
j = fw(qi, di
j) = M◦F(qi, di
j)

In traditional ranking models, the function F represents a set of hand-crafted features. The
set of hand-crafted features include query, document, and query-document features. A
ranking model M is trained to map the feature vector F(qi, di
j) into a real-valued relevance
score such that the most relevant documents to a given query are scored higher to maxi-
mize a rank-based metric.
In recently proposed ranking models, deep learning architectures are leveraged to learn
both feature vectors and models simultaneously. The features are extracted from query,
document, and query-document interactions. The neural ranking models are trained using
ground truth relevance of query-document pairs. The main objective of this article is to
discuss the deep neural architectures that are proposed for the document retrieval task. To
describe the overall steps of training neural ranking models, in the next section, we give a
brief overview about the different learning strategies before presenting the existing neural
ranking models.

5  Categories of strategies for learning for ad‑hoc retrieval

is the entire set of documents that are associated with a given query in the training
data. Listwise approaches can be divided into two types. In the first, the loss function is
directly related to evaluation measures (Chakrabarti et al., 2008; Chapelle & Wu, 2009;
Qin et al., 2009). So, they directly optimize for a ranking metric such as NDCG, which
is more challenging because these metrics are often not differentiable with respect to
the model parameters. Therefore, these metrics are relaxed by approximation to make
computation efficient. For the second type, the loss function is differentiable, but it is
not directly related to the evaluation measures (Cao et al., 2007; Huang & Frey, 2008;
Volkovs & Zemel, 2009). For example, in ListNet (Cao et al., 2007), the probability dis-
tribution of permutations is used to define the loss function. Since a ranking list can be
seen as a permutation of documents associated with a given query, a model represent-
ing the probability distribution of permutations, like the Plackett-Luce (Plackett, 1975)
model, can be applied for ranking in ListNet.

6  Model categories

We discuss neural ranking models that are proposed in the document retrieval literature
based on multiple dimensions. These dimensions capture the neural components and
design of the proposed methods in order to better understand the benefits of each design
principle.

6.1  Representation‑focused models vs. interaction‑focused models

When extracting features from a query-document pair, the feature extractor F can be
applied separately to the query and document, or it can be applied to the interaction
between the query and document.

Feature vector of

Document

(
tokens)

Relevance
score

M( , )

Feature vector of

Query
(
tokens)

6.1.1  Representation‑focused models

The general framework of representation-focused models is shown in Fig. 2. In representa-
tion-focused models, two independent neural network models NNQ and NND map the query
q and the document d, respectively, into feature vectors NNQ(q) and NND(d) . Thus the fea-
ture extractor F for a query-document pair is given by:

(3)
F(q, d) = (NNQ(q), NND(d))

In the particular case where NNQ and NND are identical, the neural architecture is consid-
ered to be Siamese (Bromley et al., 1993).
The relevance score of the query-document pair is calculated using a simple M function
like cosine similarity, or a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) between the representations of
query and document:

M(q, d) =cosine(NNQ(q), NND(d)); or
M(q, d) = MLP([NNQ(q);NND(d)])

position of the document and query by generating positional sentence representations. The
next step in MV-LSTM is to model the interactions between the generated features using
the tensor layer (Socher et al., 2013b, c). The matching between query and document is
usually captured by extracting the strongest signals. Therefore, k-max pooling (Kalchbren-
ner et al., 2014) is used to extract the top k strongest interactions in the tensor layer. Then, a
MLP is used to calculate the relevance score.

6.1.2  Interaction‑focused models

Models in the representation-focused group defer the interaction between two inputs until
extracting individual features, so that there is a risk of missing important matching signals
in the document retrieval task. The interaction-based models start by building local interac-
tions for a query-document pair using simple representations, then train a deep model to
extract the important interaction patterns between the query and document. The general
framework for interaction-focused models is shown in Fig. 3. The interaction-based models
capture matching signals between query and document in an early stage.
In interaction-focused models, F captures the interactions between query and document.
For example, Guo et al. (2016) introduced a Deep Relevance Matching Model (DRMM)
to perform term matching using histogram-based features. The interaction matrix between
query and document is computed using pairwise cosine similarities between the embed-
dings of query tokens and document tokens. DRMM builds a histogram-based feature to
extract matching patterns from different levels of interaction signals rather than different
positions. In order to control the contribution of each query token to the final relevance
score, the authors propose a term gating network with a softmax function.
The histogram feature in DRMM (Guo et al., 2016) is computed based on a hard assign-
ment of cosine similarities between a given query token and the document tokens. This his-
togram-based feature counts the total number of document tokens with a similarity to the
query token that falls within the predefined bin’s range of the histogram. The histogram-
based representation is not differentiable for the purpose of updating the ranking model
parameters in the back-propagation phase, and not computationally efficient. To solve this
problem, kernel pooling for soft-match signals is used in K-NRM (Xiong et al., 2017b).
Pairwise cosine similarities are compared against a set of K kernels, where each kernel rep-
resents a normal distribution with a mean and standard deviation. Then, kernel pooling is

Document

(
tokens)

( ,
)

M( , )
Relevance
score

Query
(
tokens)

authors proposed a Position-Aware Convolutional Recurrent Relevance (PACRR) match-
ing model to capture information about the position of a query term and how it interacts
with tokens from a document. In order to extract local matching patterns from the cosine
similarity interaction matrix, the authors applied CNN filters with multiple kernel sizes. A
max-pooling is then applied over the depth channel (number of CNN filters) of the feature
maps. This operation assumes that only one matching pattern from all filters is important
for a given kernel size representing a query and document n-gram size. The final feature
vector is computed using a second k-max pooling over the query dimension in order to
keep the strongest signals for each query token.
McDonald et al. (2018) proposed a model called PACRR-DRMM that adapts a PACRR
model for the DRMM architecture in order to incorporate contextual information of each
query token. A PACRR-based document-aware query token encoding is used instead of
the histogram-based feature of DRMM. Then, like in DRMM, each PACRR-based fea-
ture is passed through a MLP to independently score each query encoding. Finally, the
resulting scores are aggregated using a linear layer. Unlike DRMM, PACRR-DRMM does
not include a term gating network that outputs a weight for each query token, because the
PACRR-based feature already includes inverse document frequency (IDF) scoring for each
query token.
Jaech et al. (2017) designed a neural ranking model called Match-Tensor that explores
multiple channel representation for the interaction tensor to capture rich signals when com-
puting query-document relevance scores. The similarity between query and document is
computed for each channel. Two bi-LSTMs are used to encode the word embedding-based
representation of the query and document into LSTM states. The encoded sequences cap-
ture the sequential structure of query and document. A 3-D tensor (query, document, and
channel dimensions) is then calculated by point-wise product for each query term repre-
sentation and each document term representation to produce multiple match channels. A
set of convolutional filters is then applied to the 3-D tensor in order to predict the query-
document relevance score.
The idea of n-gram soft matching is further investigated by Dai et  al. (2018) in the
Conv-KNRM model. CNN filters are used to compose n-grams from query and docu-
ment. This leads to an embedding for each n-gram in the query and document. The n-gram
embeddings are then fed to a cross-match layer in order to calculate the cosine similarities
between query and document n-grams. Similar to Xiong et al. (2017b), kernel pooling is
used to build soft matching feature vectors from the cosine similarity matrices.
MLP-based ranking models: The objective of ranking models is to predict a real-valued
relevance score for a given query-document pair. So, most of the proposed neural archi-
tectures contain a MLP layer that is used to map the final feature vector into a real-valued
score. In general, the MLP used in neural ranking architectures is a nonlinear function.

6.1.3  Representation+interaction models

Document

Interac on
model

(
tokens)

Retrieval score

Query
(
tokens)

Representa on

model

Fig. 4   Overview of the framework of Representation+Interaction model for DUET. An interaction model
and a representation model are used to compute the interaction and representation scores, respectively for a
query-document pair. The final score under the DUET is the sum of scores from the interaction and repre-
sentation models

the convolutional layer is passed through two fully connected layers, a dropout layer, and
a final fully connected layer that produces a final relevance score. The distributed model
learns a lower-dimensional feature vector for the query and document. A word embedding-
based representation is used to encode each query term and document term. A series of
nonlinear transformations is then applied to the embedded input. The matching between
query and document representations is calculated using element-wise product. The final
score under the DUET architecture is the sum of scores from the local and the distributed
networks.
In recently proposed models, there are more proposed architectures in the interaction-
focused category than the representation-focused category. Nie et  al. (2018) show in
their empirical study that the interaction-based neural architectures generally lead to bet-
ter results than the representation-focused architectures in information retrieval tasks.
Although the representation-focused models offer the advantage of efficient computation
by having the same feature vector for a document in all tasks, a static feature representation
is unable to capture the matching signals in different tasks and datasets. On the other hand,
the interaction-focused neural networks can be computationally expensive, as they require
pairwise similarities between embeddings of query and document tokens, but they have the
advantage of learning the matching signals from the interaction of two inputs at the very
beginning stages.

6.2  Context aware‑based representation

Fig. 5   Query-centric assumption. The sentences that are used in this example are extracted from Wikipe-
dia. Each query token is shown with a different color that corresponds to the query-centric context in the
document. A binary judgement is shown to indicate the relevance between the query and the query-centric
context, where red cross denotes not relevant assessment, and the green check mark denotes relevant assess-
ment. The final relevance score is the aggregation of the query-centric relevance scores

each time step (there is forward and backward contextual information) which are concat-
enated and fed to a second bi-LSTM model to extract two feature vectors from the last time
step of forward and backward LSTM. The whole process is repeated to match contexts in
the inverse direction and extract two additional feature vectors. The four final feature vec-
tors are concatenated and fed to a fully connected network to predict a real-valued score.

6.3  Attention‑based representation

mechanism to combine the four representations. The prediction layer is composed of two
attention layers to output the final feature vector that is fed to a MLP in order to obtain the
final relevance score.
The use of multiple functions in attention is not limited to the calculation of attention
weights. Multiple functions can be used to compare the embedding of a given token with
its context generated using the attention mechanism. Wang and Jiang (2017) use several
comparison methods in order to match the embedding of a token and its context. These
comparison methods include neural network layer, neural tensor network (Socher et al.,
2013d), Euclidean distance, cosine similarity, and element-wise operations for vectors.
In addition to being used in LSTM models, the attention mechanism has been beneficial
to CNN models. Yin et al. (2015) proposed an Attention Based Convolutional Neural Net-
work (ABCNN) that incorporates the attention mechanism on both the input layer and the
feature maps obtained from CNN filters. ABCNN computes attention weights on the input
embedding in order to improve the feature map computed by CNN filters. Then, ABCNN
computes attention weights on the output of CNN filters in order to reweight feature maps
for the attention-based average pooling.

6.4  External knowledge and feedback

multiplied by the attention weights to compute the final context-guided embedding for each
token.
Inspired by traditional ranking techniques that use Pseudo Relevance Feedback (PRF)
(Hedin et  al., 2009) to improve retrieval results, PRF can be integrated in neural rank-
ing models as in the model proposed by Li et al. (2018). The authors introduce a Neural
framework for Pseudo Relevance Feedback (NPRF) that uses two ranking models. The first
model computes a query-based relevance score between the query and document corpus
and extracts the top candidate documents for a given query. Then, the second model com-
putes a document-based relevance score between the target document and the candidate
documents. Finally, the query-based and document-based relevance scores are combined to
compute the final relevance score for a query-document pair.

6.5  Deep contextualized language model‑based representations

The sentence pair classification setting is used to solve the document retrieval task. The
overview of BERT for the document retrieval is shown in Fig.  6. In general, the input
sequence to BERT is composed of the query q and selected tokens sd from the document
d: [[CLS], q, [SEP], sd , [SEP]]. The selected tokens can be the whole document, sentences,
passages, or individual tokens. The hidden state of the [CLS] token is used for the final
retrieval score prediction.
While BERT has been successfully applied to Question-answering (QA), applying
BERT to ad-hoc retrieval of documents comes with the challenge of having significantly

longer documents than BERT allows (BERT cannot take input sequences longer than 512
tokens). Yang et al. (2019a) proposed to address the length limit challenge by dividing
documents into sentences and applying BERT to each of these sentences. The sentence-
level representation of a document is motivated by recent work (Zhang et al., 2018) which
shows that a single excerpt of a document is better than a full document for high recall
in retrieval. In addition, using sentence-level representation is related to research in pas-
sage-level document ranking (Liu & Croft, 2002). For each document, its relevance to the
query can be predicted using the maximum relevance of its component sentences which is
denoted as the best sentence. Yang et al. (2019a) generalize the best sentence concept by
choosing the top-k sentences from each document based on the retrieval score calculated
by BERT for sentence pair classification setting. A weighted sum of the top-k sentence-
level scores, which are computed by BERT, is then applied to predict the retrieval score of
the query-document pair. In the training phase, BERT is fine-tuned on microblog data or
QA data, and the results show that training on microblog is more effective than QA data for
ad-hoc document retrieval (Yang et al., 2019a). The hidden state of the [CLS] token is also
used by Nogueira and Cho (2019) to rank candidate passages.
For long document tasks such as document retrieval on ClueWeb09-B (Dai et al., 2018),
XLNet (Yang et al., 2019b) uses TransformerXL (Dai et al., 2019) instead of BERT. Trans-
formerXL uses a relative positional encoding and segment recurrence mechanism to cap-
ture longer-term dependency. XLNet (Yang et al., 2019b) results in a performance gain
around 1.87% for compared to the BERT-based model.
Qiao et  al. (2019) explore multiple ways to fine-tune BERT on two retrieval tasks:
TREC Web Track ad-hoc document ranking and MS MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016) pas-
sage re-ranking. Four BERT-based ranking models are proposed which are related to both
representation and interaction based models using the [CLS] embedding, and also the
embeddings of each token in the query and document. The authors show that BERT works
better with pairs of texts that are semantically close. However, as mentioned before, queries
and documents can be very different, especially in their lengths and can benefit from rel-
evance matching techniques.
BERT contains multiple Transformer layers, where the deeper the layer, the more con-
textual information is captured. BERT can be used in the embedding layer to extract tensor
contextualized embeddings for both query and document. Then, the interactions between
query and document is captured by computing an interaction tensor from the embedding
tensors of both the query and document. Finally, a ranking function maps the interaction
tensor to a real-valued relevance score. The overview of the BERT model that is used as an
embedding layer is shown in Fig. 7.
In order to capture both relevance and semantic matching, MacAvaney et al. (2019) pro-
pose a joint model that incorporates the representation of [CLS] from the query-document
pair into existing neural ranking models (DRMM (Guo et al., 2016), PACCR (Hui et al.,

Fig. 8   Overview of a possible joint model for document retrieval that incorporates both the semantic and
relevance matching. BERT is used as a semantic matching component, where the embedding of the [CLS]
token is considered as a semantic feature. An existing relevance-based neural ranking model extracts the
relevance feature from a query-document pair

2017), and K-NRM (Xiong et al., 2017b)). The overview of a simple example of a joint
model is shown in Fig. 8. The representation of the [CLS] token provides a strong seman-
tic matching signal given that BERT is pretrained on the next-sentence prediction. As we
explained previously, some of the neural ranking models, like DRMM, capture relevance
matching for each query term based on the similarities with the document tokens. For rank-
ing models, MacAvaney et al. (2019) use pretrained contextual language representations
as input, instead of the conventional pretrained word vectors to produce a context-aware
representation for each token from the query and document.
Dai and Callan (2019) augment the BERT-based ranking model with the search knowl-
edge obtained from search logs. The authors show that BERT benefits from tuning on the
rich search knowledge, in addition to the language understanding knowledge which is
obtained from training BERT on query-document pairs.
Nogueira et al. (2019) propose a multi-stage ranking architecture. The first stage consists
of extracting the candidate documents using BM25. In this stage, recall is more important
than precision to cover all possible relevant documents. The irrelevant documents can be
discarded in the next stages. The second stage, called monoBERT, uses a pointwise rank-
ing strategy to filter the candidate documents from the first stage. The classification set-
ting of BERT with sentence pairs is used to compute the relevance scores. The third stage,
called duoBERT, is a pairwise learning strategy that computes the probability of a given
document being more relevant than another candidate document. Documents from the sec-
ond stage are ranked using duoBERT relevance scores in order to obtain the final ranked
list of documents. The input to duoBERT is the concatenation of query, first document, and
second document, where [SEP] is added between the sentences, and [CLS] is added to the
beginning of the concatenated sentence.
As explained earlier, exact matching is an important matching signal in traditional IR
models, and relevance matching-based neural ranking models incorporate the exact match-
ing signal to improve retrieval results. In order to directly incorporate exact matching sig-
nal in the sentence pair classification setting of BERT for document retrieval, Boualili et al.
(2020) proposed to mark the start and end of exact matching query tokens in a document
with special markers.

7  Neural ranking models features

1.	 Symmetric: We describe a neural ranking architecture as symmetric if the relevance score
does not change if we change the order of inputs (query-document or document-query
pairs). In other words, for a given query and document, there are no special computations
that are applied only to the query or document.
2.	 Attention: This dimension characterizes neural ranking models that have any type of
attention mechanisms.
3.	 Ordered tokens: The sequential order of tokens is preserved for both query and docu-
ment when computing the interaction tensors between query and document, and the final
feature vector representing the query-document pair.
4.	 Representation: This feature characterizes neural ranking models that extract features
from the query and document separately, and defer the interactions between the features
to the ranking function.

–	 Without weights sharing (W): Two independent deep neural networks without
weights sharing are used to extract features from queries and documents.
–	 With weights sharing or Siamese (S): The neural ranking model has Siamese archi-
tecture as described by Bromley et al., (1993), where the same deep neural network
is used to extract features from both query and document.

5.	 Interaction: This feature characterizes neural ranking models that build local interactions
between query and document in an early stage, so it can be considered as the mutually
exclusive category of representation models.
6.	 Injection of contextual information: Depending on when to inject contextual information,
we can distinguish two cases.

–	 Early injection of contextual information (E): Some neural ranking models incorpo-
rate contextual information in the embedding phase by considering context-sensitive
embeddings (for example the embedding that is computed using LSTM).
–	 Late injection of contextual information (L): Some neural ranking models defer
injecting the contextual information until computing the interaction tensors (for
example, applying n-gram convolutions on the interaction tensor to incorporate con-
textual information).

7.	 Exact matching: This feature means that the neural ranking model includes the exact
matching signal when calculating relevance score.
8.	 Incorporate external knowledge bases (KB): This feature characterizes neural ranking
models that incorporate external knowledge bases to predict query-document relevance
score.
9.	 Deep language models (LM): This feature refers to the use of deep contextualized lan-
guage models to compute query-document relevance scores. We can distinguish two
cases for deep LM.

2019)
✓
✓
✓
✓
E
Em

2019a)
✓
✓
✓
E
Se

Table 1 shows the main IR features of each neural ranking model from all proposed catego-
ries. The neural ranking models are sorted in chronological order based on the publication
year. Unsurprisingly, in recent years, there have been more proposed neural ranking models
that are based on BERT because deep contextualized language models achieve state-of-the-
art results in multiple tasks for NLP and IR. Later in the discussion part, we will discuss
more research directions to reduce the time and memory complexity of BERT-based rank-
ing models. Except for DUET (Mitra et al., 2017), all the neural ranking models have either
the interaction or representation feature.
Recent proposed methods are interaction-based ranking models that prefer building the
interactions between query and document in an early stage to capture matching signals. As
mentioned in Sect. 6, DUET combines a representation-based model without weights shar-
ing, with an interaction-based model to predict the final query-document relevance score.
Given the recent advances in the embedding layer for deep learning models, early injec-
tion of contextual information is a common design choice for multiple neural ranking mod-
els. The contextual information is incorporated from the first stage which consists of an
embedding layer either by using traditional neural recurrent components such as LSTM or
more advanced deep contextualized representations, such as the Transformer.
In general, the models that are proposed primarily for text matching tasks are symmetric
because the inputs are homogeneous. On the other hand, many models that are proposed
primarily for document retrieval are not symmetric because there are special computations
that are applied only to the query or the document. For example, kernel pooling is used
in Conv-KNRM (Dai et al., 2018) to summarize the similarities between a given query
token and all document tokens. So, this can be seen as a query-level operation that breaks
the symmetric property. An example of a document level operation that leads to an asym-
metric architecture is included in ABEL-DRMM (McDonald et al., 2018). The attention
weights are only computed for each document token against a given query token to pro-
duce the attention-based representation of the document. So, the attention mechanism is
only applied at the document level, and therefore the neural ranking model is asymmet-
ric. The asymmetric property of some BERT-based ranking models comes from multiple
facts. First, BERT is applied to the sentence or passage level of a long document (Yang
et al., 2019a; Nogueira & Cho, 2019; Dai & Callan, 2019; Zhan et al., 2020a), so that there
are some preprocessing steps that are applied only to the document. Second, some BERT-
based models, such as MacAvaney et al. (2019), are combined with existing relevance-
based ranking models that are asymmetric, and others, such as Nogueira et  al. (2019),
include a component for pairwise comparison of documents, so that the joint model is
asymmetric in both cases. Third, Boualili et al. (2020) include the exact matching of query
tokens into the ranking model which leads to an overall asymmetric architecture. In the
case of short documents where BERT can accept the full document and only the BERT-
based model is used for ranking, the ranking model is symmetric.

8  Beyond document retrieval

8.1  Structured document retrieval

The information retrieval field has presented multiple methods to incorporate the
internal organization of a given document into indexing and retrieval steps. The pro-
gress in document design and storage has resulted in new representations for docu-
ments, known as structured documents (Chiaramella, 2000), such as HTML and XML,
where the document has multiple fields. Considering the structure of a document when
designing retrieval models can usually improve retrieval results (Wilkinson, 1994).
Zamani et al, (2018) proposed a neural ranking model that extracts the document rep-
resentation from the aggregation of field-level representations and then uses a match-
ing network to predict the final relevance score.
Beyond Web pages, a table itself can also be considered as a structured document.
Zhang & Balog, (2018) propose a semantic matching method for table retrieval where
various embedding features are used. Chen et al. (2020a) first learn the embedding rep-
resentations of table headers and generate new headers with embedding features and
curated features (Chen et al., 2018) for data tables. They show that the generated head-
ers can be combined with the original fields of the table in order to accurately predict
the relevance score of a query-table pair, and improve ranking performance. Trabelsi
et al. (2019) proposed a new word embedding of the tokens of table attributes, called
MCON, using the contextual information of every table. Different formulations for
contexts are proposed to create the embeddings of attribute tokens. The authors argued
that the different types of contexts should not all be treated uniformly and showed that
data values are useful in creating a meaningful semantic representation of the attribute.
In addition to computing word embeddings, the model can predict additional contexts
of each table and use the predicted contexts in a mixed ranking model to compute the
query-table relevance score. Using multiple and differentiated contexts leads to more
useful attribute embeddings for the table retrieval task.
Shraga et al. (2020) use different neural networks to learn different unimodal rep-
resentations of a table which are combined into a multimodal representation. The
final table-query relevance is estimated based on the query representation and multi-
modal representation. Chen et al. (2020b) first select the most salient items of a table
to construct the BERT representation for the table search, where different types of
table items and salient signals are tested. The proposed content selection technique
improves the performance of ad-hoc table retrieval. On the other hand, using the que-
ries to select the table content can lead to a significant increase in the processing time
because extracting data table representations cannot be performed offline. Trabelsi
et al. (2020b) proposed to include summary vectors about the contents of the table,
both in terms of values in each column and values in selected rows. The summary vec-
tors compress each row and each column into a fixed length feature vector using word
embedding of data values.
Inspired by recent progress of transfer learning on graph neural networks, Trabelsi
et al. (2020c) proposed to represent a large collection of data tables using graphs. In
particular, a knowledge graph representation using fact triples < subject, predicate,
object> indicates the relations between entities, then R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et  al.,
2018), which is an extension of GCN for knowledge graphs, is applied on knowledge
graphs to learn representations for graph nodes and relations.

8.2  Question‑answering

Question-answering (QA) (Diefenbach et al., 2018; Lai et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019) is
the task that focuses on retrieving texts that answer a given user’s question. The extracted
answers can have different lengths, and vary from short text, passage, paragraph or docu-
ment. QA also includes choosing between multiple choices, and synthesizing answers from
multiple resources in case the question looks for multiple pieces of information.
The QA problem presents multiple challenges. The question is expressed in natural lan-
guage, and the objective is to search for short answers in a document. So only the parts
that are relevant to the question should be extracted. The second challenge is the differ-
ent vocabulary used in questions and answers. So, a QA model needs to capture matching
signals based on the intents of the question in order to extract an accurate answer. The
third challenge is to gather responses from multiple sources to compose an answer. As in
document retrieval, multiple neural ranking models are proposed to retrieve answers that
are relevant to a given user’s question (Guo et al., 2019; Abbasiyantaeb & Momtazi, 2020;
Huang et al., 2020). The neural ranking models for QA cover all five proposed categories
for document retrieval with a focus on the semantic matching signal between questions and
answers.

8.3  Image retrieval

from medical images, such as MRI data, and then identifying the most similar images to a
given query image by comparing the extracted features using similarity metrics.

8.4  Ad‑hoc video search

Ad-hoc video search (Awad et al., 2016) consists of retrieving video frames from a large
collection of videos where the retrieved videos are relevant to the user’s query. Similar
to document retrieval, text-based video retrieval using the filename, text surrounding the
video, etc, has achieved high performance for the video retrieval with a simple query that
has few keywords (Snoek & Worring, 2009). Recently, researchers have focused on sce-
narios where the query is more complex and defined as natural language text. In this case,
a cross-modal semantic matching between the textual query and the video is captured to
retrieve a set of relevant videos.
Two categories are defined for existing methods on complex query-based video
retrieval: concept-based (Snoek & Worring 2009; Yuan et al., 2011; Nguyen et al., 2017)
and embedding-based (Li et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2019; Miech et al., 2018, 2019) catego-
ries. In concept-based methods, visual concepts are used to describe the content of a video.
Then, the user’s query is mapped to related visual concepts which are used to retrieve a set
of videos by aggregating matching signals from the visual concepts. This approach works
well for queries where related visual concepts are accurately extracted. However, capturing
semantic similarity between videos and long queries by aggregating visual concepts is not
accurate because these queries contain complex semantic meaning. In addition, extracting
visual concepts for a video and query is done independently. Embedding-based methods
propose to map queries and videos into a common space, where the similarity between the
embeddings is computed using distance functions, such as cosine similarity.
As in document retrieval, many video retrieval models are representation-focused mod-
els where the only difference is the cross-modal characteristic of the neural ranking model:
one deep neural network for video embedding and another deep neural network for text
embedding. For example, Yang et al. (2020) propose a text-video joint embedding learn-
ing for complex-query video retrieval. The text-based network which is used to embed the
query has a context-sensitive embedding with LSTM for an early injection of contextual
information as in the document retrieval. Consecutive frames in a video have the temporal
dependence feature. So, as in textual input, LSTM can be used to capture the contextual
information of frames after extracting frame-based features using pretrained CNN. As in
BERT where the self-attention is used to capture token interactions, Yang et al. (2020)
introduce a multi-head self-attention for video frames. So, this neural ranking model for
video retrieval covers multiple proposed categories for the document retrieval which are:
representation-focused models, context-aware based representation, and attention-based
representation (with both attention and self-attention).

9  Lessons learned and future directions

9.1  What are the important matching signals in document retrieval?

The neural ranking models that are previously described present two important matching
techniques: semantic matching and relevance matching (Guo et al., 2016). Semantic match-
ing is introduced in multiple text matching tasks, such as natural language inference, and
paraphrase identification. Semantic matching, which aims to model the semantic similar-
ity between the query and the document, assumes that the input texts are homogeneous.
Semantic matching captures composition and grammar information to match two input
texts which are compared in their entirety. In information retrieval, the QA task is a good
scenario for semantic matching, where semantic and syntactic features are important to
compute the relevance score. On the other hand, semantic matching is not enough for docu-
ment retrieval, because a typical scenario is to have a query that contains keywords. In such
cases, the relevance matching is needed to achieve better retrieval results.
Relevance matching is introduced by Guo et al., (2016) to solve the case of heteroge-
neous query and document in ad-hoc document retrieval. The query can be expressed by
keywords, so a semantic signal is less informative in this case because the composition
and grammar of a keyword-based query are not well defined. In addition, the position of
a given token in a query has less importance than the strength of the similarity signal, so
some neural ranking models, like DRMM (Guo et al., 2016), do not preserve the position
information when computing the query-document feature vector. An important signal in
the relevance matching is the exact matching of query and document tokens. In traditional
retrieval models, like BM25, exact matching is primarily used to rank a set of documents,
and the model works reasonably well as an initial ranker. Incorporating exact matching into
neural ranking models can improve the retrieval performance mainly in terms of recall for
keyword-based queries because as in traditional ad-hoc document retrieval, the document
has more content than the query and the presence of query keywords in a document is an
initial indicator of relevance.
From the review of many neural ranking models, we can conclude that both seman-
tic and relevance matching signals are important to cover multiple scenarios of ad-hoc
retrieval tasks. This is empirically justified by achieving significant improvements in
retrieval results when using neural ranking models that guarantee both matching signals.
For example, the joint model, proposed by MacAvaney et al. (2019), combines the repre-
sentation of [CLS] from BERT and existing relevance-based neural ranking models. This
model has a semantic matching signal from [CLS] because BERT is pretrained on the next
sentence prediction, and a relevance matching signal from existing neural ranking models.
Both the semantic and relevance components are interaction-based neural architectures that
generally lead to better results than the representation-based architectures in information
retrieval tasks (Nie et al., 2018). The disadvantage of using the BERT model as a semantic
matching component is the length limit of BERT which causes difficulties in both training
and inference. In general, the length of a document exceeds the maximum length limit of
BERT, so that the document is divided into sentences or passages. Splitting the document
and then aggregating the relevance scores increases the training and inference time.

9.2  Choice of embedding: how to compute query and document representations?

Glove. A part of using context-sensitive embedding is to incorporate the query context
into the ranking model to improve the precision of ad-hoc retrieval. Recent neural rank-
ing models use deep contextualized pre-trained language models to compute a contextual
representation for each token. There are mainly two advantages from using these models;
first, they are bidirectional language representations, in contrast to only left-to-right or
right-to-left language models so that every token can attend to previous and next tokens to
incorporate the context from both directions. Second, they contain the attention mechanism
which becomes an important component of sequence representations in multiple tasks,
especially the Transformer’s self-attention which captures long-range dependencies better
than the recurrent architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). So, this contextual representation
covers both the context-aware representation and the attention-based representation. The
expensive computation is still a limitation when incorporating the pre-trained language
models. For example, the large BERT model has 340M parameters consisting of 24 lay-
ers of Transformer blocks, 16 self-attention heads per layer and a hidden size of 1024.
Zhan et al. (2020a) analyzed the performance of BERT in document retrieval using the
model proposed by Nogueira and Cho (2019). The analysis showed that the [CLS], [SEP],
and periods are distributed with a large proportion of attention because they appear in all
inputs. BERT has multiple layers, and the authors showed that there is different behavior
in different layers. The first layers are representation-focused, and extract representations
for a query and a document. The intermediate layers learn contextual representations using
the interaction signals between the query and document. Finally, for the last layers, the rel-
evance score is predicted based on the interactions between the high-level representations
of a given query-document pair.
External knowledge bases and graphs are incorporated into neural ranking models to
provide additional embeddings for the query and document. Knowledge graphs contain
human knowledge and can be used in neural ranking models to better understand queries
and documents. In general, the entity-based representation, that is computed from knowl-
edge bases, is combined with the word-based representation. In addition, the knowledge
graph semantics, such as the description and type of entity, provide additional signals that
can be incorporated into the neural ranking model to improve retrieval results and general-
ize to multiple scenarios.
The existing methods, that incorporate knowledge graphs into the ranking models, lev-
erage mainly entities and knowledge graph semantics. However, knowledge graphs often
provide rich axiomatic knowledge that can be explored in future research to improve
retrieval results.

9.3  How to reduce the complexity of the neural ranking architectures that use deep
contextualized language models?

2020). In particular, for very long documents, applying self-attention of Transformers
is not feasible. So, BERT-based ranking models have a large increase in computational
cost and memory complexity over the existing traditional and neural ranking models. A
current research direction is the design of efficient and effective deep language model-
based ranking architectures. For example, Khattab and Zaharia (2020) presented a rank-
ing model that is based on contextualized late interaction over BERT (ColBERT). The
proposed model reduces computation time by extracting BERT-based document repre-
sentations offline, and delays the interaction between query and document representa-
tions. RepBERT (Zhan et al., 2020b) and RocketQA (Qu et al., 2021) are other models
proposed to solve the passage retrieval task following the same direction of designing
a representation-based model with BERT being the main component to map the query
and document. As in ColBERT, the objective is to overcome the computation time and
memory limitations of the cross-encoding attentions related to the sentence pair setting
of BERT. Despite the promising results of the BERT variants (ColBERT, RepBERT,
RocketQA), reducing the memory complexity is still an open research question for mul-
tiple reasons. First, the document embeddings need to be loaded into the system or GPU
memory (Johnson et al., 2021) with a limited size to compute the relevance scores of
query-document pairs. Second, the dimension of the embedding is very large compared
to the bag-of-word index (Zhan et  al., 2021a; Xiong et  al., 2021). Therefore, vector
compression methods (Jégou et al., 2011; Ge et al., 2014) have been integrated into neu-
ral ranking models to compress the embedding index and save computational resources
with compressed embeddings of documents. The compression methods include Prod-
uct Quantization (PQ) (Jégou et al., 2011, 2014) and Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
(Indyk & Motwani, 1998). Improving the memory efficiency using index compression
can lead to a drop in the performance of the neural ranking model. Zhan et al., (2021b)
proposed a joint optimization of query encoding and PQ in order to maintain effective-
ness of neural ranking models while compressing index sizes. The authors showed that
an end-to-end training strategy of the encoding and compression steps overcomes the
training based on the reconstruction error for many compression methods (Jégou et al.,
2011; Ge et al., 2014; Guo et al., 2020).
In the same direction of reducing the ranking model complexity, Hofstätter et  al.
(2020) reduced the time and memory complexity of Transformers by considering the
local self-attention where a given token can only attend to tokens in the same sliding
window. In the particular case of non-overlapping sliding windows of size w << m , the
time and memory complexity is reduced from O(m2) to O(m × w) . Recently, Kitaev et al.
(2020) improved the efficiency of Transformers and proposed the Reformer which is
efficient in terms of memory and runs faster for long sequences by reducing the com-
plexity from O(m2) to O(m × log(m)) . The Reformer presents new opportunities to
achieve the trade-off between high retrieval results and low computation time. ElMo
provides deep contextualized embeddings without the length limit constraint and can be
used as a semantic matching component as it is pre-trained on the next word prediction.
A possible multi-stage ranking architecture, that has a trade-off between retrieval results
and computation time, can be composed of a first stage that re-ranks a set of candidate
documents obtained from BM25 using an ElMo-based semantic and relevance model
(example of relevance models: K-NRM, Conv-KNRM, DRMM, etc). Then, for the sec-
ond stage, the top ranked documents from the first stage are re-ranked using a BERT-
based semantic and relevance model. This multi-stage model has the potential to reduce
the number of documents that should be ranked with BERT.

10  Summary

An end-to-end LTR architecture for ad-hoc document retrieval consists of extracting fea-
tures from a query-document pair using a feature extractor, and mapping the extracted
features to a real-valued relevance score using a ranking function. A core component of
such a system is a neural ranking model, and in this survey, we have presented several
such models. We began by introducing deep learning terminologies and techniques in
Sect. 2 in order to cover the major components that are used in different neural ranking
models. Then, We present the document retrieval field in Sect. 3. The objective of the
document ranking and retrieval is to retrieve a set of documents where the top ranked
documents are more relevant to the user’s query.
After formulating the document ranking task using the LTR framework in Sect. 4,
we reviewed the three learning to rank approaches used in ad-hoc retrieval in Sect. 5
namely, pointwise, pairwise, and listwise approaches. We summarized several tech-
niques from each to address the advantages and drawbacks of each approach. In Sect. 6,
we summarized the neural ranking models in ad-hoc retrieval, and we proposed placing
the neural ranking models into five groups, where each group has unique neural compo-
nents and architectures. In Sect. 7, we discussed the features of neural ranking models.
In particular, we proposed nine features that are frequently presented in neural ranking
models. These features are used for an in-depth overview of several neural ranking mod-
els that are proposed in the literature. This overview gives a global view for the current
state of neural ranking models in addition to the work that has been done during the last
several years. In Sect. 8, we showed that neural ranking models can generalize beyond
the document retrieval. In particular, we described four related retrieval tasks: struc-
tured document retrieval, question-answering, image retrieval, and ad-hoc video search.
Finally, in Sect. 9, we discussed the important signals in neural ranking models which
are the semantic and relevance matching. In addition, we focused on a research direc-
tion that studies the trade-off between high quality retrieval results and fast computation
mainly for ranking models with deep contextualized language models.
By grouping the neural ranking models, we analyzed the main features of each proposed
model, and pointed to future research directions based on the important signals of the ad-
hoc retrieval. In particular, we reviewed the design principles of neural ranking models
that are used to extract the representation of a given query-document pair. The number of
proposed neural ranking architectures is increasing, and this survey can help researchers
by providing an overview about the current progress, and suggesting some potential direc-
tions to improve neural ranking models for document retrieval in both retrieval results and
computation time.

Author contributions  The first draft of the manuscript was written by all authors. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Funding  This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
IIS-1816325.

Data availability and material  Not applicable.

Code availability  Not applicable.

Declarations

Conflict of interest  Not applicable.

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit

References

Abbasiyantaeb, Z., & Momtazi, S. (2020). Text-based question answering from information retrieval and
deep neural network perspectives: A survey. arXiv:​2002.​06612.
Awad, G., Fiscus, J., Joy, D., Michel, M., Smeaton, A., Kraaij, W., Quénot, G., Eskevich, M., Aly, R., Ordel-
man, R., Ritter, M., Jones, G., Huet, B., & Larson. M. (2016). Trecvid 2016: Evaluating video search,
video event detection, localization, and hyperlinking. In TRECVID
Azad, H. K., & Deepak, A. (2019). Query expansion techniques for information retrieval: A survey. Infor-
mation Processing and Management, 56(5), 1698–1735.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2015). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA,
USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., & Janvin, C. (2003). A neural probabilistic language model. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 1137–1155.
Bollacker, K. D., Evans, C., Paritosh, P., Sturge, T., & Taylor, J. (2008). Freebase: A collaboratively created
graph database for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2008, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 10-12, 2008 (pp.
1247–1250). ACM.
Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., Weston, J., & Yakhnenko, O. (2013). Translating embeddings
for modeling multi-relational data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp.
2787–2795).
Boualili, L., Moreno, J. G., & Boughanem, M. (2020). Markedbert: Integrating traditional ir cues in pre-
trained language models for passage retrieval. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 1977–1980), New York, NY,
USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
Bromley, J., Bentz, J., Bottou, L., Guyon, I., LeCun, Y., Moore, C., Sackinger, E., & Shah, R. (1993). Signa-
ture verification using a “siamese” time delay neural network. International Journal of Pattern Rec-
ognition and Artificial Intelligence, 7, 669–688.
Burges, C. J. C., Shaked, T., Renshaw, E., Lazier, A., Deeds, M., Hamilton, N., & Hullender, G. N. (2005).
Learning to rank using gradient descent. In 2005 Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twenty-Sec-
ond International Conference (ICML 2005), Bonn, Germany, August 7-11, 2005, vol. 119 of ACM
International Conference Proceeding Series (pp. 89–96). ACM.
Cai, H., Zheng, V., & Chang, K. (2017). A comprehensive survey of graph embedding: Problems, tech-
niques and applications. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 09, 2017.
Callan, J. P. (1994). Passage-level evidence in document retrieval. In 1994 Proceedings of the 17th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp.
302–310), Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
Cao, D., Yu, Z., Zhang, H. ling, Fang, J., Nie, L., & Tian, Q. (2019). Video-based cross-modal recipe
retrieval. Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia.
Cao, Z., Qin, T., Liu, T., Tsai, M., & Li, H. (2007). Learning to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise
approach. In Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference (ICML
2007), Corvallis, Oregon, USA, June 20-24, 2007, vol. 227 of ACM International Conference Pro-
ceeding Series (pp. 129–136). ACM

Chakrabarti, S., Khanna, R., Sawant, U., & Bhattacharyya, C. (2008). Structured learning for non-smooth
ranking losses. In 2008 Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, August 24-27, 2008 (pp. 88–96). ACM..
Chan, W., Jaitly, N., Le, Q. V., & Vinyals, O. (2016). Listen, attend and spell: A neural network for large
vocabulary conversational speech recognition. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2016, Shanghai, China, March 20-25, 2016 (pp. 4960–4964).
IEEE.
Chapelle, O., & Wu, M. (2009). Gradient descent optimization of smoothed information retrieval met-
rics. Information Retrieval, 13, 216–235.
Chen, D., Bolton, J., & Manning, C. D. (2016). A thorough examination of the CNN/daily mail reading
comprehension task. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (pp. 2358–2367). Berlin, Germany, Aug. 2016. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Chen, Z., Jia, H., Heflin, J., & Davison, B. D. (2018). Generating schema labels through dataset content
analysis. In Companion Proceedings of the The Web Conference 2018 (pp. 1515–1522).
Chen, Z., Jia, H., Heflin, J., & Davison, B. D. (2020a). Leveraging schema labels to enhance dataset
search. In European Conference on Information Retrieval (pp. 267–280). Springer
Chen, Z., Trabelsi, M., Heflin, J., Xu, Y., & Davison, B. D. (2020b). Table search using a deep contex-
tualized language model. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 589–598), New York, NY, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery.
Chiaramella, Y. (2000). Information retrieval and structured documents. In Lectures on Information
Retrieval, Third European Summer-School, ESSIR 2000, Varenna, Italy, September 11-15, 2000,
Revised Lectures, volume 1980 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (pp. 286–309). Springer.
Cho, K., van Merriënboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., & Bengio, Y.
(2014). Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1724–1734). Doha, Qatar, Oct. 2014. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Chung, J., Ç. Gülçehre, Cho, K., Bengio, Y. (2014). Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural net-
works on sequence modeling. arXiv:​1412.​3555
Chung, Y.-A., & Weng, W.-H. (2017). Learning deep representations of medical images using siamese
cnns with application to content-based image retrieval. arXiv:​1711.​08490​v2
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., & Kuksa, P. P. (2011). Natural lan-
guage processing (almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2493–2537.
Cossock, D., & Zhang T. (2006). Subset ranking using regression. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual
Conference on Learning Theory (pp. 605–619). Springer-Verlag
Dai, A. M., & Le, Q. V. (2015). Semi-supervised sequence learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 28: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2015,
December 7-12, 2015, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (pp. 3079–3087).
Dai, Z. & Callan, J. (2019). Deeper text understanding for IR with contextual neural language modeling.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2019, Paris, France, July 21-25, 2019 (pp. 985–988). ACM.
Dai, Z., Xiong, C., Callan, J., & Liu, Z. (2018). Convolutional neural networks for soft-matching
n-grams in ad-hoc search. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining (pp. 126–134).
Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J. G., Le, Q. V., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2019). Transformer-xl:
Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the 57th Conference
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2,
2019, Volume 1: Long Papers (pp. 2978–2988). Association for Computational Linguistics
Dalton, J., Dietz, L., & Allan, J. (2014). Entity query feature expansion using knowledge base links.
Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by
latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6):391–407.
Dettmers, T., Minervini, P., Stenetorp, P., & Riedel, S. (2018). Convolutional 2D knowledge graph
embeddings. In 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1811–1818)
Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,

Huang, G., Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, & Weinberger, K. Q. (2017). Densely connected convolutional
networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (pp.
2261–2269).
Huang J. C., & Frey, B. J. (2008). Structured ranking learning using cumulative distribution networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
December 8-11, 2008 (pp. 697–704). Curran Associates, Inc.,
Huang, P., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., Acero, A., & Heck. L. P., (2013). Learning deep structured seman-
tic models for web search using clickthrough data. In 22nd ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM’13, San Francisco, CA, USA, October 27 -
November 1, 2013 (pp. 2333–2338). ACM
Huang, Z., Xu, S., Hu, M., Wang, X., Qiu, J., Fu, Y., Zhao, Y., Y. xing Peng, & Wang, C. (2020). Recent
trends in deep learning based open-domain textual question answering systems. IEEE Access, 8,
94341–94356
Hui, K., Yates, A., Berberich, K., & de Melo, G. (2017). PACRR: A position-aware neural IR model
for relevance matching. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017 (pp. 1049–
1058). Association for Computational Linguistics
Hui, K., Yates, A., Berberich, K., & de Melo, G. (2018). Co-pacrr: A context-aware neural IR model for
ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining, WSDM 2018, Marina Del Rey, CA, USA, February 5-9, 2018 (pp. 279–287).
ACM
Indyk, P., & Motwani, R. (1998). Approximate nearest neighbors: Towards removing the curse of dimen-
sionality. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing,
Dallas, Texas, USA, May 23-26, 1998 (pp. 604–613). ACM.
Ioffe, S., & Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015, vol. 37 (pp. 448–456).
Jaech, A., Kamisetty, H., Ringger, E. K., & Clarke, C. (2017). Match-tensor: a deep relevance model for
search. arXiv:​1701.​07795
Jégou, H., Douze, M., & Schmid, C. (2011). Product quantization for nearest neighbor search. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(1), 117–128.
Joachims, T. (2002). Optimizing search engines using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the Eighth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, July 23-26,
2002, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (pp. 133–142). ACM.
Johnson, J., Douze, M., & H. Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions on
Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2021.
Kalchbrenner, N., Grefenstette, E., & Blunsom, P. (2014). A convolutional neural network for modelling
sentences. Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers)
Karpathy, A., & Fei-Fei, L. (2017). Deep visual-semantic alignments for generating image descriptions.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 39(4), 664–676.
Khattab, O., & Zaharia, M. (2020). Colbert: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized
late interaction over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 39–48), New York, NY, USA, 2020.
Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380164.
Khokhlova, M., Gouet-Brunet, V., Abadie, N., & Chen, L. (2020). Cross-year multi-modal image
retrieval using siamese networks. In ICIP 2020 – 27th IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing, Abou Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Oct. 2020. IEEE. URL
tes.​fr/​hal-​02903​434.
Kim, S., Kang, I., & Kwak, N. (2019). Semantic sentence matching with densely-connected recurrent
and co-attentive information. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp.
6586–6593). AAAI Press.
Kim, Y., Jernite, Y., Sontag, D. A., & Rush, A. M. (2016). Character-aware neural language models. In
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016,
Phoenix, Arizona, USA (pp. 2741–2749). AAAI Press.
Kipf, T. N. & Welling, M. (2017). Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April
24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings.

Kitaev, N., Kaiser, L., & Levskaya, A. (2020). Reformer: The efficient transformer. In 8th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.

Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). ImageNet classification with deep convolutional
neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6), 84–90.
Lai, T. M., Bui, T., & Li, S. (2018). A review on deep learning techniques applied to answer selection. In
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (pp. 2132–2144),
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, Aug. 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lample, G., Ballesteros, M., Subramanian, S., Kawakami, K., & Dyer, C. (2016). Neural architectures for
named entity recognition. In NAACL HLT 2016, The 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, San Diego Cali-
fornia, USA, June 12-17, 2016 (pp. 260–270). The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
Lan, W., & Xu, W. (2018). Character-based neural networks for sentence pair modeling. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018,
Volume 2 (Short Papers) (pp. 157–163). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Le, Q. V., & Mikolov, T. (2014). Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In Proceedings
of the 31th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2014, Beijing, China, 21-26 June
2014, volume 32 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings (pp. 1188–1196).
org/
LeCun, Y., & Bengio, Y. (1998). Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech, and Time Series (pp. 255–
258). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998. ISBN 0262511029.
Lehmann, J., Isele, R., Jakob, M., Jentzsch, A., Kontokostas, D., Mendes, P. N., Hellmann, S., Morsey, M.,
P. van Kleef, Auer, S., & Bizer, C. Dbpedia - a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted
from wikipedia. Semantic Web, 6:167–195, 2015.
Li, C., Sun, Y., He, B., Wang, L., Hui, K., Yates, A., Sun, L., & J. Xu. (2018). NPRF: A neural pseudo rel-
evance feedback framework for ad-hoc information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November
4, 2018 (pp. 4482–4491). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Li, P., Burges, C. J. C., & Wu, Q. (2007). Mcrank: Learning to rank using multiple classification and gradi-
ent boosting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20, Proceedings of the Twenty-
First Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada, December 3-6, 2007 (pp. 897–904). Curran Associates, Inc.
Li, X., Xu, C., Yang, G., Chen, Z., & Dong, J. (2019). W2vv++: Fully deep learning for ad-hoc video
search. Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multimedia
Lin, J., Nogueira, R., & Yates, A. (2020). Pretrained transformers for text ranking: BERT and beyond.
CoRR, arXiv:​2010.​06467.
Lin, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, M., Liu, Y., & Zhu, X. (2015). Learning entity and relation embeddings for knowledge
graph completion. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 2181–2187).
Liu, T.-Y. (2009). Learning to rank for information retrieval. Foundation and Trends Information Retrieval,
3(3):225–331, Mar. 2009. ISSN 1554-0669.
X. Liu & Croft, W. B. (2002). Passage retrieval based on language models. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, (pp. 375–382), New York,
NY, USA, 2002. Association for Computing Machinery.
Liu, X., & Fang, H. (2015). Latent entity space: A novel retrieval approach for entity-bearing queries. Infor-
mation Retrieval Journal, 18, 473–503.
Liu, Z., Xiong, C., Sun, M., & Liu, Z. (2018). Entity-duet neural ranking: Understanding the role of knowl-
edge graph semantics in neural information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol. 1: Long Papers) (pp. 2395–2405).
Lu, J., Yang, J., Batra, D., & Parikh, D. (2016). Hierarchical question-image co-attention for visual question
answering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain (pp. 289–297).
Ma, X., & Hovy, E. H. (2016). End-to-end sequence labeling via bi-directional lstm-cnns-crf. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016, August
7-12, 2016, Berlin, Germany, Vol. 1: Long Papers. The Association for Computer Linguistics.
MacAvaney, S., Yates, A., Cohan, A., & Goharian, N. (2019). CEDR: contextualized embeddings for docu-
ment ranking. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2019, Paris, France, July 21-25, 2019 (pp. 1101–1104).
ACM.

McDonald, R. T., Brokos, G., & I. Androutsopoulos. Deep relevance ranking using enhanced document-
query interactions. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018 (pp. 1849–1860). Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
Miech, A., Laptev, I., & Sivic. J. (2018). Learning a text-video embedding from incomplete and heterogene-
ous data. arXiv:​1804.​02516
Miech, A., Zhukov, D., J.-B. Alayrac, Tapaswi, M., Laptev, I., & Sivic, J. (October 2019). Howto100m:
Learning a text-video embedding by watching hundred million narrated video clips. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013a). Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space. In 1st International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013, Scottsdale,
Arizona, USA, May 2-4, 2013, Workshop Track Proceedings.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013b). Distributed representations of words
and phrases and their compositionality. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems - Vol. 2 (pp. 3111–3119).
Mitra, B., & Craswell, N. (2018). An introduction to neural information retrieval. Now Foundations and
Trends, 13(1), 1–126.
Mitra, B., Diaz, F., & Craswell, N. (2017). Learning to match using local and distributed representations of
text for web search. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
2017, Perth, Australia, April 3-7, 2017 (pp. 1291–1299). ACM.
Mnih, A. & Hinton, G. (2007). Three new graphical models for statistical language modelling. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’07 (pp. 641–648). ACM.
Mueller, J., & Thyagarajan, A. (2016). Siamese recurrent architectures for learning sentence similarity. In
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoe-
nix, Arizona, USA (pp. 2786–2792). AAAI Press.
Nguyen, P., Li, Q., Z.-Q. Cheng, Y.-J. Lu, Zhang, H., Wu, X., & Ngo, C.-W. (2017). Vireo @ trecvid 2017:
Video-to-text, ad-hoc video search, and video hyperlinking. In TRECVID.
Nguyen, T., Rosenberg, M., Song, X., Gao, J., Tiwary, S., Majumder, R., & Deng, L. (2016). MS MARCO:
A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Cognitive Computation: Integrating neural and symbolic approaches 2016 co-located with the 30th
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain,
December 9, 2016, volume 1773 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
Nie, Y., Li, Y., & Nie, J. (2018). Empirical study of multi-level convolution models for IR based on repre-
sentations and interactions. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGIR International Conference on The-
ory of Information Retrieval, ICTIR 2018, Tianjin, China, September 14-17, 2018 (pp. 59–66). ACM.
Nogueira, R., & Cho, K. (2019). Passage re-ranking with bert. arXiv:​1901.​04085
Nogueira, R., Yang, W., Cho, K., & J. Lin. Multi-stage document ranking with bert. arXiv:​1910.​14424.
Onal, K. D., Zhang, Y., Altingövde, I. S., Rahman, M. M., Senkul, P., Braylan, A., Dang, B., Chang, H.,
Kim, H., McNamara, Q., Angert, A., Banner, E., Khetan, V., McDonnell, T., Nguyen, A. T., Xu, D.,
Wallace, B. C., Rijke, M., & Lease, M. (2017). Neural information retrieval: At the end of the early
years. Information Retrieval Journal, 21, 111–182.
Palangi, H., Deng, L., Shen, Y., Gao, J., He, X., Chen, J., Song, X., & R. Ward. Deep sentence embedding
using long short-term memory networks: Analysis and application to information retrieval. IEEE/
ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 24 (4):694–707, 2016.
Pang, L., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., & Cheng, X. (2016a). A study of matchpyramid models on ad-hoc
retrieval.
Pang, L., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., Wan, S., & Cheng, X. (2016b). Text matching as image recognition. In
Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoe-
nix, Arizona, USA (pp. 2793–2799). AAAI Press.
Pang, L., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., Xu, J., & Cheng, X. (2017). Deeprank: A new deep architecture for rel-
evance ranking in information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management (pp. 257–266).
Pascanu, R., Mikolov, T., & Bengio, Y. (2013). On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, Atlanta, GA,
USA, 16-21 June 2013, volume 28 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings (pp. 1310–1318).

Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. (Oct. 2014a). GloVe: Global vectors for word representation.
In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) (pp. 1532–1543). Association for Computational Linguistics.

Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2014b). Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1532–1543).
Peters, M. E., Ammar, W., Bhagavatula, C., & Power, R. (2017). Semi-supervised sequence tagging with
bidirectional language models. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL 2017, Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, Volume 1: Long
Papers (pp. 1756–1765). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Peters, M. E., Neumann, M., Iyyer, M., Gardner, M., Clark, C., Lee, K., & Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). Deep
contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers) (pp.
2227–2237). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Plackett, R. L. (1975). The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C
(Applied Statistics), 24(2):193–202.
Qiao, Y., Xiong, C., Liu, Z., & Liu, Z. (2019). Understanding the behaviors of bert in ranking. arXiv:​

1904.​07531.
Qin, T., Liu, T.-Y., & Li, H. (2009). A general approximation framework for direct optimization of infor-
mation retrieval measures. Information Retrieval, 13, 375–397.
Qiu, X., & Huang, X. (2015). Convolutional neural tensor network architecture for community-based
question answering. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
(pp. 1305–1311). AAAI Press, 2015. ISBN 9781577357384.
Qu, Y., Ding, Y., Liu, J., Liu, K., Ren, R., Zhao, W. X., Dong, D., Wu, H., & Wang, H. (2021). Rock-
etQA: An optimized training approach to dense passage retrieval for open-domain question
answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online,
June 6-11, 2021 (pp. 5835–5847). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Raviv, H., Kurland, O., & Carmel, D. (2016). Document retrieval using entity-based language models.
In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2016, Pisa, Italy, July 17-21, 2016 (pp. 65–74). ACM.
Ristoski, P., & Paulheim, H. (2016). RDF2Vec: RDF graph embeddings for data mining. In International
Semantic Web Conference, (pp. 498–514). Springer.
Robertson, S. E., Walker, S., Jones, S., M. Hancock-Beaulieu, & Gatford, M. (1993). Okapi at TREC-2.
In Proceedings of The Second Text REtrieval Conference, TREC 1993, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
USA, August 31 - September 2, 1993, volume 500-215 of NIST Special Publication, (pp. 21–34).
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Robertson, S. E., Walker, S., Jones, S., M. Hancock-Beaulieu, & Gatford, M. (1994). Okapi at TREC-3.
In Proceedings of The Third Text REtrieval Conference, TREC 1994, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
USA, November 2-4, 1994, volume 500-225 of NIST Special Publication (pp. 109–126). National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Rocktäschel, T., Grefenstette, E., Hermann, K. M., Kocisky, T., & Blunsom, P. (2016). Reasoning about
Entailment with Neural Attention. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Sakata, W., Shibata, T., Tanaka, R., & Kurohashi, S. (2019) Faq retrieval using query-question similar-
ity and bert-based query-answer relevance. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, (pp. 1113–1116). Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019. ISBN 9781450361729.
Schlichtkrull, M., Kipf, T. N., Bloem, P., R. van den Berg, Titov, I., & Welling, M. (2018). Modeling
relational data with graph convolutional networks. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (pp.
593–607).
Schuster, M., & Paliwal, K. (1997). Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Sig-
nal Processing, 45(11), 2673–2681.
Shen, Y., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., & Mesnil, G. (2014a). A latent semantic model with convolutional-
pooling structure for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Confer-
ence on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM 2014, Shanghai, China,
November 3-7, 2014 (pp. 101–110). ACM.
Shen, Y., He, X., Gao, J., Deng, L., & Mesnil, G. (2014b). Learning semantic representations using
convolutional neural networks for web search. In 23rd International World Wide Web Conference,
WWW ’14, Seoul, Republic of Korea, April 7-11, 2014, Companion Volume (pp. 373–374). ACM.
Shen, Y., Deng, Y., Yang, M., Li, Y., Du, N., Fan, W., & Lei, K. (2018). Knowledge-aware attentive neu-
ral network for ranking question answer pairs. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference

Trabelsi, M., Chen, Z., Davison, B. D., & Heflin, J. (2020b). A hybrid deep model for learning to rank
data tables. In IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Big Data 2020, Atlanta, GA, USA,
December 10-13, 2020 (pp. 979–986). IEEE.
Trabelsi, M., Chen, Z., Davison, B. D., & Heflin, J. (2020c). Relational graph embeddings for table
retrieval. In IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Big Data 2020, Atlanta, GA, USA,
December 10-13, 2020 (pp. 3005–3014). IEEE.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser L. U., & Polo-
sukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
30, 5998–6008.
Volkovs, M., & Zemel, R. S. (2009). Boltzrank: learning to maximize expected ranking gain. In Proceed-
ings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2009, Montreal, Que-
bec, Canada, June 14-18, 2009 vol. 382 of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series (pp.
1089–1096). ACM.
Wan, J., Wu, P., Hoi, S., Zhao, P., Gao, X., Wang, D., Zhang, Y., & Li, J. (2015). Online learning to rank for
content-based image retrieval. In Proceedings of the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 2284–2290).
Wan, S., Lan, Y., Guo, J., Xu, J., Pang, L., & Cheng, X. (2016a). A deep architecture for semantic matching
with multiple positional sentence representations. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA (pp. 2835–2841). AAAI Press.
Wan, S., Lan, Y., Xu, J., Guo, J., Pang, L., & Cheng, X. (2016b). Match-srnn: Modeling the recursive
matching structure with spatial rnn. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 2922–2928). AAAI Press, ISBN 9781577357704.
Wang, Q., Mao, Z., Wang, B., & Guo, L. (2017). Knowledge graph embedding: A survey of approaches and
applications. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 29(12), 2724–2743.
Wang, S., & Jiang, J. (2017). A compare-aggregate model for matching text sequences. In 5th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference
Track Proceedings.
Wang, S., Zhou, W., & Jiang, C. (2020). A survey of word embeddings based on deep learning. Computing,
102(3):717–740.
Wang, W., Pan, S. J., Dahlmeier, D., & Xiao, X. (2017a). Coupled multi-layer attentions for co-extraction
of aspect and opinion terms. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, February 4-9, 2017, San Francisco, California, USA (pp. 3316–3322). AAAI Press.
Wang, Z., Zhang, J., Feng, J., & Chen, Z. (2014). Knowledge graph embedding by translating on hyper-
planes. In Twenty-Eighth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 1112–1119).
Wang, Z., Hamza, W., & Florian, R. (2017b). Bilateral multi-perspective matching for natural language sen-
tences. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
IJCAI-17 (pp. 4144–4150). URL
Wiggers, K. L., Britto, A. S., Heutte, L., Koerich, A. L., & Oliveira, L. (2019). Image retrieval and pattern
spotting using siamese neural network. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN) (pp. 1–8).
Wilkinson, R. (1994). Effective retrieval of structured documents. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Inter-
national ACM-SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. Dublin,
Ireland, 3-6 July 1994 (Special Issue of the SIGIR Forum) (pp. 311–317). ACM/Springer.
Wu, H., Luk, R. W., Wong, K., & Kwok, K. (2017). A retrospective study of a hybrid document-context
based retrieval model. Information Processing and Management, 43(5), 1308–1331.
Wu, P., Zhang, X., & Feng, Z. (2019). A survey of question answering over knowledge base. In Knowledge
Graph and Semantic Computing: Knowledge Computing and Language Understanding (pp. 86–97).
Springer.
Xiong, C., Callan, J., & T. Liu, T. (2016). Bag-of-entities representation for ranking. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM on International Conference on the Theory of Information Retrieval, ICTIR 2016, Newark,
DE, USA, September 12- 6, 2016 (pp. 181–184). ACM.
Xiong, C., Callan, J., & Liu, T. (2017a). Word-entity duet representations for document ranking. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 7-11, 2017 (pp. 763–772). ACM.
Xiong, C., Dai, Z., Callan, J., Liu, Z., & Power, R. (2017b). End-to-end neural ad-hoc ranking with kernel
pooling. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’17 (pp. 55–64). ACM.
Xiong, L., Xiong, C., Li, Y., Tang, K., Liu, J., Bennett, P. N., Ahmed, J., & Overwijk, A. (2021). Approxi-
mate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. In 9th International

Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021.
OpenR​eview.​net/.
Xu, D., Ruan, C., Korpeoglu, E., Kumar, S., & Achan, K. (2020a). Product knowledge graph embedding for
e-commerce. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
(pp. 672–680).
Xu, J., He, X., & Li, H. (2020b). Deep learning for matching in search and recommendation. Found. Trends
Inf. Retr., 14(2-3): 102–288.
Xu, Y., G. Jones, J. F., & Wang, B. (2009). Query dependent pseudo-relevance feedback based on wikipedia.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2009, Boston, MA, USA, July 19-23, 2009 (pp. 59–66). ACM.
Yang, L., Ai, Q., Guo, J., & Croft, W. B. (2016a). anmm: Ranking short answer texts with attention-based
neural matching model. Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management–CIKM ’16.
Yang, W., Zhang, H., & Lin. J. (2019). Simple applications of bert for ad hoc document retrieval. arXiv:​

2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The
Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu,
Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019 (pp. 7442–7449). AAAI Press.
Zhang, S., & Balog, K. (2018). Ad hoc table retrieval using semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the 2018
World Wide Web Conference on World Wide Web, WWW 2018, Lyon, France, April 23-27, 2018 (pp.
1553–1562). ACM.
Zheng, Z., Chen, K., Sun, G., & Zha, H. (2017). A regression framework for learning ranking functions
using relative relevance judgments. In SIGIR 2007: Proceedings of the 30th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, July 23-27, 2007 (pp. 287–294). ACM.
Zheng, Z., Zha, H., & Sun, G. (Sep. 2008). Query-level learning to rank using isotonic regression. In 2008
46th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (pp. 1108–1115).
Zhou, J., Cui, G., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., & Sun, M. (2018). Graph neural networks: A review of meth-
ods and applications. arXiv:​1812.​08434.
Zhou, W., Li, H., & Tian, Q. (2017). Recent advance in content-based image retrieval: A literature survey.

arXiv:​1706.​06064.

Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.