Rashina Hoda

Abstract—Grounded Theory (GT), a sociological research method designed to study social phenomena, is increasingly being used to
investigate the human and social aspects of software engineering (SE). However, being written by and for sociologists, GT is often
challenging for a majority of SE researchers to understand and apply. Additionally, SE researchers attempting ad hoc adaptations of
traditional GT guidelines for modern socio-technical (ST) contexts often struggle in the absence of clear and relevant guidelines to do
so, resulting in poor quality studies. To overcome these research community challenges and leverage modern research opportunities,
this paper presents Socio-Technical Grounded Theory (STGT) designed to ease application and achieve quality outcomes. It deﬁnes
what exactly is meant by an ST research context and presents the STGT guidelines that expand GT’s philosophical foundations,
provide increased clarity and ﬂexibility in its methodological steps and procedures, deﬁne possible scope and contexts of application,
encourage frequent reporting of a variety of interim, preliminary, and mature outcomes, and introduce nuanced evaluation guidelines
for different outcomes. It is hoped that the SE research community and related ST disciplines such as computer science, data science,
artiﬁcial intelligence, information systems, human computer/robot/AI interaction, human-centered emerging technologies (and
increasingly other disciplines being transformed by rapid digitalisation and AI-based augmentation), will beneﬁt from applying STGT to
conduct quality research studies and systematically produce rich ﬁndings and mature theories with conﬁdence.

arXiv:2103.14235v3 [cs.SE] 9 Sep 2021

Index Terms—Socio-technical grounded theory, STGT, grounded theory, GT, software engineering, research method, theory, theory
development, qualitative research, data analysis, guidelines, evaluation

!

1
INTRODUCTION
G

ROUNDED theory is a complete research method that
enables systematic and evidence-based development
of theory. The emergence of the Grounded Theory (GT)
method challenged the dominance of quantitative research
in sociology in the mid-1960’s and marked an emphatic
resurgence of qualitative research. Since its introduction
(Glaser and Strauss; 1967), GT has evolved into three ver-
sions: the Classic or Glaserian version by one of the founding
fathers, Barney Glaser, who continued to support the orig-
inal method (Glaser; 1992; Glaser and Strauss; 1967), the
second being the Strauss-Corbinian version introduced by
the other founding father, Anselm Strauss, in collaboration
with Juliet Corbin (Strauss and Corbin; 1990), and the third,
Constructivist GT version, introduced by Kathy Charmaz
nearly two decades ago (Charmaz; 2006).
GT is a deep dive into an area of interest or phenomenon.
It is particularly suited to understudied areas, phenomena
with gaps between research and practice, and for addressing
complex and deep questions of how and why in addition to
the what of the phenomenon being studied. While GT is
said to be a general method open to quantitative data, it
is predominantly applied as a qualitative method through
traditional data collection techniques such as interviews
and observations. GT’s unique features include rigorous
qualitative data analysis procedures such as open coding
and constant comparison and systematic theory development.
Using an iterative, incremental, and interleaved approach
to data collection and analysis, GT is one of the most

• deﬁning the socio-technical research context as it ap-
plies to SE research,

• presenting simple and contextualised guidelines for
conducting and evaluating STGT research,

• explicitly listing the fundamental knowledge and skills
required to achieve quality outcomes,

• expanding its philosophical foundations to accommo-
date a range of paradigms and perspectives,

• offering the option to apply the full STGT method or
STGT for Data Analysis within other methods,

• offering guidelines on harnessing modern data types,
sources, collection tools, and analysis techniques,

• offering the option to select from emergent or struc-
tured theory development modes later in the process,
once experience with basic data collection and analysis
is gained,

• encouraging frequent reporting of a variety of interim,
preliminary, and mature outcomes,

• presenting nuanced evaluation guidelines for different
types of applications and outcomes.
As with any guidelines, practical applications will serve
to provide feedback for further improvements.

2
GROUNDED THEORY – SOCIAL TRADITIONS

2.1
The Origins

2.3
The Evolution

2.2
The Method

Coleman and O’Connor (2007)
Using grounded theory to understand software process improvement... Information and Software Technology.
Hoda et al. (2010)
Organizing self-organizing teams, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
Dagenais et al. (2010)
Moving into a new software project landscape, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
Hoda et al. (2011)
The impact of inadequate customer collaboration on self-organizing Agile teams, Information and Software Technology.
Hoda et al. (2012b)
Self-organizing roles on agile software development teams, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.
Adolph et al. (2012)
Reconciling perspectives: A grounded theory of how people manage the process of software development, Journal of Systems and Software.
Maglyas et al. (2013)
What are the roles of software product managers? An empirical investigation, Journal of Systems and Software.
Jantunen and Gause (2014)
Using a grounded theory approach for exploring software product management challenges, Journal of Systems and Software.
∗Waterman et al. (2015)
How much up-front? A grounded theory of agile architecture, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
Stray et al. (2016)
The daily stand-up meeting: A grounded theory study, Journal of Systems and Software.
∗Hoda and Noble (2017)
Becoming agile: A grounded theory of agile transitions in practice, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
Sedano et al. (2017)
Software development waste, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
∗Sousa et al. (2018)
Identifying design problems in the source code: A grounded theory, IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering.
Masood et al. (2020a)
How agile teams make self-assignment work: a grounded theory study, Empirical Software Engineering.
Masood et al. (2020b)
Real world scrum a grounded theory of variations in practice, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.
Shastri et al. (2021a)
The role of the project manager in agile software development projects, Journal of Systems and Software.
Shastri et al. (2021b)
Spearheading agile: the role of the scrum master in agile projects, Empirical Software Engineering.

• Theory development. GT is particularly suited to
studying areas lacking existing theories, those with
research gaps, and where existing research fails to res-
onate with practice and can beneﬁt from new theories
grounded in empirical evidence.

the researcher is seen as neutral, objectively observing and
rendering reality (Charmaz; 2014). Charmaz’s plenary pre-
sentation in 1993 “caused quite a stir” with opinions promi-
nently divided along gender lines. Though initially sup-
ported mainly by women (Charmaz; 2014), Constructivist
GT subsequently had many takers, becoming a prominent
version of GT. Dedicated articles discussing the differences
between the versions in-depth can be consulted in (Babchuk;
1996; Heath and Cowley; 2004; Kenny and Fourie; 2014).

• Practice-based topics. If the research topic is practice-
based or industry relevant, it is more likely to lead
to a successful GT because it increases the possibility
of ﬁnding enough evidence from practice and for the
researcher to conduct ﬁeld observations.

• Complex and deep questions. While GT can be em-
ployed to answer the what type questions, it is best used
to explore and answer more complex and deep issues
through the how and why type questions.

3
GT IN SOFTWARE ENGINEERING

3.1
The Promise

• Primarily qualitative studies. While GT is described as
a general research method (Glaser and Strauss; 1967) ca-
pable of incorporating both qualitative and quantitative
data, there is limited guidance on achieving this. Practi-
cally, GT is most often applied as a qualitative research
method due to its rigorous qualitative data analysis
procedures and results in what Storey et al. (2020) refer
to as descriptive knowledge using their design science
approach to categorising research outcomes.

Theories have the potential to be useful to both research
and industry (Sjøberg et al.; 2008). SE researchers interested
in theory development will beneﬁt from using GT, which
promises theory development as its core feature. GT can
help researchers lay down the theoretical foundations of SE,
the youngest engineering discipline (Ebert; 2018), explaining
its unique landscape, practices, challenges, and strategies.
Being an empirical method, GT promises combining
research rigour with practical relevance – described as a
’grand challenge’ (Gregory et al.; 2016). Theories developed
using GT have the potential to lay the foundations of better
understanding SE phenomena, present recommendations
and guidelines, and motivate tools development. For exam-
ple, a GT study on the role of ethics in artiﬁcial intelligence
can lead to theories that explain how developers perceive
ethics, the socio-technical barriers to embedding ethics in
AI, and enabling strategies. Practical applications can then
be drawn in terms of practitioner guidelines for embedding
ethics in AI. Similarly, grounded theories can establish rich
theoretical foundations of the problem space, leading to
development of software tools and techniques.
Like most methods, GT has a sweet spot – an ideal
context where it is most likely to succeed and indeed where
it makes most sense to use. The application of GT promises
to beneﬁt SE studies that fall within the traditional GT
sweet spot.

• Data collected through interviews and observations.
While GT is open to including all types of data, inter-
views and observations form the most commonly used
data sources in a traditional GT study.
On the other hand, research contexts relying primar-
ily on quantitative data, exploring simple questions that
can be answered using descriptive analysis, and those not
interested in deriving theoretical frameworks, theories, or
models, do not require a GT approach. Unsurprisingly, a
majority of GT studies in software engineering in the last
decade fall within the traditional GT sweet spot.

3.2
The Progress

Traditional GT Context and Limitations
Associated SE Challenges
Socio-Technical GT Advantages

Traditional GT guidelines were written by and for
sociologists.
#EagerButNotEquipped
STGT method is written by and for ST researchers using
format, language, and examples native to SE.
Traditional GT guidelines are spread across multiple books
and three versions: Glaserian, Strauss-Corbinian, Constructivist.
#NoVersionControl
STGT guidelines present one research method, offering
ﬂexibility in its application.
Traditional GT guidelines expect the researcher to understand
all three versions and select one upfront.
#NoVersionControl
STGT delays the decision about theory development modes,
emergent or structured, after some experience is gained.
Traditional GT guidelines assume that the researcher is aware
of and possesses the requisite knowledge and skills for
conducting successful GT studies.

#EagerButNotEquipped
#PoorPresentations
#ExtremeReviews

STGT guidelines explicitly spell out the fundamental
knowledge and skills for conducting successful STGT studies.

Traditional GT guidelines focus on theory generation.
#ScopeConfusion
#ExtremeReviews
A full STGT study can be used to generate theories and STGT for
Data Analysis can be used for a data analysis only within other
research frameworks, e.g. case study.
Traditional GT methods were designed to study social
phenomena.
#DIYGoneWrong
#ExtremeReviews
STGT method enables the investigation of socio-technical
phenomena and domains.
Traditional GT guidelines were designed to use traditional
data types, sources, and collection techniques.
#DIYGoneWrong
#ExtremeReviews
STGT method is designed to leverage traditional and modern
data types, sources, and collection techniques.
Glaserian and Strauss-Corbinian GT were designed to be
standalone methods.
#DIYGoneWrong
#ExtremeReviews
STGT method can be applied standalone or in combination
with other methods and techniques.
Traditional GT guidelines did not have to consider the need
to share detailed evidence.
#EvidenceGateKeeping
#TheFacade
STGT method provides guidelines on presenting sufﬁcient
sanitised evidence and examples to establish credibility and
enable proper evaluation.

et al.; 2016) and on the other, by the rise of human and social
aspects in SE (Prikladnicki et al.; 2013) and agile software
development (Hoda et al.; 2018). GT has been used to study a
variety of human and social aspects of SE. Some exemplar
GT studies in software engineering that describe both their
method application and the resulting theory in sufﬁcient
detail are listed in Table 1. Dedicated SE papers providing
guidance on traditional GT methods include Adolph et al.
(2011), Hoda et al. (2012a), and Stol et al. (2016).

challenging for SE researchers, many of whom have little or
no sociological or qualitative research background. Often
the traditional texts start to make sense after preliminary
data collection and analysis, as researchers connect the
guidelines with their lived experiences. While the exemplar
GT studies in SE provide application details (Table 1), they
are not complete methodological guidelines for the novice
researcher. For the vast majority of SE researchers, GT
remains largely inaccessible and challenging. Not all SE
researchers need to or may want to develop theories, but
for those who are interested, GT should be accessible.

3.3
The Challenges

A critical review of GT in SE studies identiﬁed increas-
ing adoption over the last two decades but raised serious
quality concerns (Stol et al.; 2016). Of the ﬁnal 98 journal
papers analysed, half explicitly claimed to perform GT while
only a third provided details of their method application.
These were seen to apply guidelines primarily from the
Glaserian or Strauss-Corbinian versions. A majority of studies
did not acknowledge the version of GT being employed.
Some combined guidelines from different versions without
rationale. Several were seen to apply practices `a la carte with
no reference to any guidelines. Only ﬁve individual studies
were found to be comprehensive and detailed in their GT
application description, serving as exemplars (Coleman and
O’Connor; 2007), (Hoda et al.; 2011), (Adolph et al.; 2012),
(Hoda et al.; 2012b), and (Jantunen and Gause; 2014).
Over
ﬁfteen
years
of
experience
in
conducting,
supervising, reviewing, and editing GT in SE studies
suggests these widespread issues are not always intentional
method misuse or abuse. Method slurring, false claims of
applying method guidelines (Baker et al.; 1992), is but one
reason quality issues arise. Many genuine attempts fail or
lead to poor results and harsh reviews, indicating researcher
apprehensions, misunderstandings, poor presentations, and
extreme evaluations underlying the poor show of quality,
captured in the following patterns of GT in SE challenges.

#NoVersionControl
–
When
software
engineering
researchers are unaware or unclear about the different
versions of traditional GT and how to apply them in
practice. Despite in-depth attempts to delineate between
the different versions of GT (Babchuk; 1996; Heath and
Cowley;
2004;
Kenny
and
Fourie;
2014),
researchers
continue to apply traditional GT versions poorly (Stol et al.;
2016). For the novice GT researcher, understanding any one
version is challenging enough. Expecting an understanding
of all three, the differences between them, and selecting one
upfront, further raises the entry barrier.

#ScopeConfusion – When software engineering researchers
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to distinguish between conducting a full
GT study and using GT data analysis techniques alone.
GT’s data analysis procedures of open coding, constant
comparison, and selective coding are popular in qualitative
research. Sometimes SE researchers use these GT data
analysis techniques within some other research framework
and present it in a way that claims a full GT study. While
the other key GT procedures of iterative and interleaved data
collection and analysis, memoing, theoretical sampling, sorting,
coding, and theoretical saturation are clearly missing.

“You can’t use an old map to explore a new world” –
Albert Einstein

#TheFacade – When software engineering researchers do
not apply GT carefully but claim to do so. Sometimes,
SE researchers claim to apply GT but their methodology
and
outcomes
descriptions
suggest
poor
and
rushed
applications. The increasing pressure to publish, both
system permeated (e.g. tenure or promotion driven) and
self-inﬂicted (e.g. peer pressure, international rankings,
quasi-gamiﬁcation of researcher proﬁles), manifests as
increasing trends toward achieving publication quantity
over quality. While not exclusive to GT, such trends
encourage shallow research studies focusing on simple
problem spaces, low hanging fruits, instead of addressing
complex problems through deep and meaningful work
that necessitate careful method application. So long as the
research community does not acknowledge and reverse
these trends, method misuse and abuse will likely continue.

What makes successful GT practice so challenging in
SE? At the heart of these challenges lies the fundamental
misalignment of traditional, sociological GT guidelines
to study software engineering’s socio-technical research
context.

While traditional GT methods have served well to study
the human and social aspects of SE, successful GT studies
continue to be exceptions, not the norm in SE research
(Stol et al.; 2016). Designed in the mid 1960’s by and for
sociologists to study social phenomena, understandably,
traditional GT methods are not well equipped to fully
address SE’s socio-technical research context. As a ﬁrst step
to adapting GT for SE, the key limitations of traditional GT
methods and the new opportunities afforded by SE need to
be acknowledged. For example, traditional GT guidelines
are spread across multiple books and three different GT
versions, leading to the #NoVersionControl challenge. SE
researchers will beneﬁt from having a single GT method, of-
fering ﬂexibility in its application. Similarly, SE researchers
are keen to explore modern research techniques such as
sentiment analysis within GT, with some success (Madampe
et al.; 2020), but it can easily lead to #DIYGoneWrong. SE
researchers will beneﬁt from modern GT guidelines that
explain the use of modern data types, sources, collection,
and analysis techniques. Table 2 provides a set of such
contextual limitations of traditional GT guidelines, their
mapping to the associated SE challenge patterns, and how
these are addressed in the STGT guidelines (described in the
later sections).

#PoorPresentation – When software engineering researchers
struggle to present GT studies to a high standard. In
contrast to #TheFacade, this pattern captures scenarios
where the method was well applied but the outcome is
poorly presented. Tedious presentation of the ﬁndings
reading like endless walls of text and lack of clear summaries
of the theoretical and practical contributions, pertinent
quotes, and evaluation make for poor presentations.

#DIYGoneWrong – When software engineering researchers
attempt to adapt traditional GT but lack guidelines to
do so. SE researchers often attempt to combine steps and
procedures across GT versions. Such ad hoc variations
are often poorly executed. While some of these are rightly
labelled method slurring, other well-intended adaptations are
reviewed harshly because of the absence of philosophical
and methodological guidelines for adaptations.

Traditional social science research methods have been
successfully ‘translated’ and explained for the SE research
community. Runeson and H¨ost (2009) provided guidelines
for conducting and reporting Case Studies in SE research,
while Sharp et al. (2016) explained the role of Ethnography
for SE contexts, making it easier for SE researchers to apply
social science methods to studying SE phenomena. Other
efforts, outside of SE, to update traditional social science
methods for modern times include Virtual ethnography, a
modern update to traditional ethnography to cater to “novel
social spaces” (Hine; 2008) and Visual ethnography (Pink; 2020;
Schwartz; 1989).

Socio-Technical Grounded Theory (STGT) is an iterative
and incremental research method for conducting socio-
technical research using traditional and modern research
techniques to generate novel, useful, parsimonious, and
modiﬁable theories.
Distinguishing features: interleaved rounds of basic data
collection and analysis, emergent or structured mode of the-
ory development through advanced data collection, analy-
sis, and theory development procedures, using primarily
inductive but also deductive and abductive reasoning.

Motivated by the common challenges of the software en-
gineering research community in understanding and prac-
ticing traditional GT guidelines (described in section 3.3)
and with the aim to update traditional GT guidelines for
conducting socio-technical research (deﬁned next, in section
4.1), I present Socio-Technical Grounded Theory.
STGT is an iterative and incremental research method
for conducting socio-technical research using traditional and
modern research techniques. It is iterative because it involves
interleaved cycles of data collection and analysis that inform
and support each other. It is incremental because each cycle
progresses the research project toward theoretical outcomes.
The STGT guidelines include its socio-technical research
context (section 4.1), philosophical foundations (section 4.2),
methodological steps and procedures (section 5 and 6), its
application, outcomes, and reporting (section 7), and evalu-
ation (section 8). Table 4 presents an overview of the STGT
guidelines while comparing it to traditional GT guidelines.

• understanding human aspects (e.g. personality, gender, age,
emotions, motivation, etc.) in SE/AI,

• understanding human values (e.g. ethics, privacy, safety,
security, morality, etc.) in SE/AI,

• understanding social aspects (e.g. collaboration, coordina-
tion, formation etc.) in SE/AI,

• role of technology (e.g. social media, virtual/remote collab-
oration tools) in crisis management, remote work, online
education, political campaigns, gaming, etc.,

• human- and social-centered design of inclusive and responsi-
ble SE/AI systems,

• understanding socio-technical aspects of speciﬁc SE practices,
e.g. requirements elicitation, user-centered design, estima-
tion, pair/mob programming, etc.
Some meta-research topics that will beneﬁt from STGT
studies include:

• nature of human reality in the digital/AI age (ontology),

4.1
Socio-Technical Research

• role of researcher in studying ST research (epistemology),

To understand the underlying foundations of STGT, it is
important to ﬁrst deﬁne what is meant by socio-technical
research. Figure 1 shows the socio-technical research frame-
work for grounded theory, with its four dimensions:

• ethics in SE research,

• credibility in SE research,

• practical/industrial relevance in SE research,

• bias in SE reviewing (e.g. applying inappropriate evaluation
criteria: quantitative vs qualitative, research paradigm),

• Phenomenon – what is being studied? what is the level of
interplay between the social and technical aspects?

• enabling interdisciplinary research teams
Acknowledging these phenomena as socio-technical, in
SE and other domains, is the ﬁrst step to enabling more
complete and comprehensive interpretations, constructions,
and rendering of modern human realities.

• Domain and actors – in which ﬁeld or discipline does the
phenomenon occur? who are the actors?

• Researcher – who is conducting the research? what are their
knowledge and skill sets?

• Data, tools, and techniques – what is the nature of data
being collected? what tools and techniques are being used?
These dimensions capture a research landscape or con-
text that is fundamentally different to the native contexts for
which traditional GT methods were originally designed.

Fig. 1: A Framework for Socio-Technical Grounded Theory Research – socio-technical phenomenon (top left), domain and actors
(top right), researchers (bottom right), and data, tools, and techniques (bottom left).

actors in the SE domain – are the creators and maintainers
of software technology, tools, and platforms that are increas-
ingly becoming indispensable to all domains. Often referred
to as ‘geeks’, they display their own unique language,
interactions, culture, worldviews, and social norms.
Software engineers are particularly interesting to study,
as they are both the producers and users of technology.
They are not only the architects of the software platforms
that enable multiple realities, they too function and interact
within combinations of these worlds. For example, using
a combination of real and digital workspaces, artefacts,
and communication mechanisms such as GitHub, physical
Scrum task boards, online tools such as Trello or JIRA, phys-
ical and virtual pair programming, using Slack channels for
team communication, face-to-face and Zoom meetings. All
these involve intensively socio-technical interactions.
More generally, depending on the domain and the phe-
nomenon, the actors being studied may be software engineers
including developers, business analysts, testers, senior man-
agers, or software users, including classroom teachers, space-
craft designers, satellite developers, government ofﬁcials,
doctors, nurses, psychologists, artists. Additionally, STGT
studies may involve actors that are human, virtual avatars,
or AI agents, depending on the nature of the realities where
phenomena occur and are studied.

these areas. Neither do they have to be one person. To
conduct quality STGT studies, a socio-technical researcher,
or an interdisciplinary team of researchers, should typically
possess a core repertoire of knowledge and skills.

• philosophical foundations – understanding fundamental
philosophical concepts such as types of reasoning, on-
tology, epistemology, and research paradigm. A basic
overview of these concepts is presented in section 4.2.

• qualitative research – designing research protocols, ethics
assessment/approval, collecting and analysing qualita-
tive data.

• theoretical sensitivity – afﬁnity for theoretical abstraction,
conceptualisation, and theory development.

• socio-technical sensitivity – an afﬁnity for exploring and
understanding the intricacies of human interactions
and socio-technical aspects of phenomena.

Socio-Technical Researcher

4.2
STGT – Philosophical Foundations

This section presents the fundamental philosophical con-
cepts requisite to conducting quality STGT studies including
types of reasoning, ontology, epistemology, and research
paradigms. These are based on Peircean (Burch; 2018; Dou-
ven; 2017; Peirce; 1960), more modern philosophical views
(Guba and Lincoln; 1994) and relevant software engineering
literature (Easterbrook et al.; 2008; Russo and Nuseibeh;
2001; Seaman; 1999; Wohlin and Aurum; 2015) and are
presented in an accessible way for researchers non-native to
social science. Table 3 presents an overview of these key con-
cepts including simple deﬁnitions, examples, and how they
are manifested in research. Table 4 presents a comparison
of STGT with traditional Glaserian, Strauss-Corbinian, and
Constructivist GT, across their philosophical foundations
(second block). Understanding these fundamental philo-
sophical concepts is critical to performing quality research
studies and evaluations, especially STGT studies.

Socio-Technical Data Tools and Techniques

TYPES OF REASONING (AKA INFERENCE OR LOGIC)

Reasoning
Description
Example
Manifestation in STGT

Induction
A bottom-up approach of drawing general conclusions
from patterns evidenced across speciﬁc instances.
Strength of evidence improves certainty of the con-
clusion that is localised not universal.

A sparrow in a city is observed with brown-black-
white feathers, another sparrow is observed with sim-
ilar coloured feathers, and another, until the observer
ﬁnds a pattern amongst a number of sparrows and
concludes that all sparrows in the city are likely to
have brown-black-white feathers.

Open coding, targeted coding,
and constant comparison.

Deduction
A top-down approach of drawing conclusions about
speciﬁc instances from general facts or theories. The
conclusion can be veriﬁed through repeated testing,
giving rise to the term hypothetico-deductive approach,
and is guaranteed certainty until proven false.

All birds have beaks, a Pigeon is a bird, so a Pigeon
has a beak.
Theoretical sampling.

Abduction
A ‘detour’ approach of proposing the best possible ex-
planation based on all the evidence, albeit incomplete,
available. Abduction plays an important role in theory
development.

If bird feathers are spotted on the doormat and the
family cat is seen with some feathers on their paws,
the most likely explanation is that the cat ate the bird.

Memoing,
theoretical
struc-
turing, theoretical integration.

ONTOLOGY, EPISTEMOLOGY, & RESEARCH PARADIGMS

Concept
Deﬁnition
Type & Example
Manifestation in STGT

Ontology
Ontology refers to what we believe
exists or what we perceive as real-
ity, in a research context.

Only directly observable material bodies are real, or both
material and immaterial forms are real, or reality includes
socially constructed concepts such as identities and beliefs.

STGT enables the study of physical, virtual,
combined, and simulated realities.

Epistemology Epistemology refers to what we
treat as knowledge and how we can
know about what we perceive as
reality, in a research context.

A subjectivist epistemology holds that knowledge about
actors & phenomena is subjectively constructed through
inputs from the participants by non-interchangeable re-
searchers. An objectivist epistemology holds that knowl-
edge about objects & phenomena is derived through neu-
tral measurements or observations by interchangeable re-
searchers.

Subjective epistemology for physical, virtual,
and combined contexts. Objective epistemol-
ogy possible for some simulated contexts.

Research
Paradigm
Research paradigm refers to the
combination
of
ontological
and
epistemological
stances
that
in-
forms the researcher’s worldview.

Constructivism aligns with the concept of a socially con-
structed reality that is subjectively co-constructed. Posi-
tivism aligns with the concept of a standalone external
reality that can be objectively observed.

Constructivism with Symbolic interactionism
in physical, virtual, & combined contexts.
Positivism in simulated contexts. Combina-
tions possible (e.g. constructivist-feminist GT)

in memoing, theoretical structuring, and theoretical integration
(procedures described later.)

• Positivism refers to a deﬁnite, assured, and certain nature
of reality that can be studied through direct observations, and
excludes traditional metaphysics and theology. The ontological
lens used in positivism suggests reality is external and
standalone, irrespective of human existence or interference,
and ready to be discovered through (only) what can be ob-
served and measured. The observer’s job is to discover and
render it accurately. The epistemology native to positivism
is objectivist which suggests knowledge about reality is dis-
covered through objective observations and measurements
by neutral and interchangeable observers who do not in-
ﬂuence the reality by their presence or measurements. Con-
sequently, positivists emphasise veriﬁcation through testing
of hypotheses or existing theories against observable facts
and value reproducibility, replicability, refutability, general-
isability, and statistical signiﬁcance. Research methods typi-
cally following a positivist paradigm include controlled and
quasi-experiments, although survey and case study research
is also known to be conducted with a positivist approach
(Easterbrook et al.; 2008).
Positivism
is
naturally
associated
with
quantitative
data and deductive reasoning, drawing speciﬁc conclusions
from general facts through repeated testing and prov-
ing/falsiﬁcation of hypotheses. Historically, quantitative re-
searchers with positivist inclinations have been staunch crit-
ics of qualitative research often conducted with interpretive
approaches (Charmaz; 2014). Post positivism, on the other
hand, refocuses attention on falsiﬁcation of hypothesis, in-
creasing conﬁdence in proposed theories with every failed
attempt at falsiﬁcation (Easterbrook et al.; 2008).
Classic or Glaserian GT has been associated with a
positivist approach (Charmaz; 2006).

Epistemology
Epistemology refers to what can be treated as knowledge and
how that knowledge is gained, in a research context. As re-
searchers, we hold different views about how we can gain
knowledge about the reality of our research context, referred
to as our epistemological stance. For example, we may
believe that we can learn about the research world (objects
and phenomena therein) through neutral measurements or
observations where exchanging an observer with another
will yield the same results. This is referred to as an objectivist
epistemology. On the other hand, we may believe that we
can learn about the research world through subjective inter-
pretations of observations where exchanging the observer
with another will likely yield different ﬁndings. This is
referred to as a subjectivist epistemology.
STGT highlights that a researcher’s epistemological
stance is typically determined by two aspects, the nature of
the reality being studied, e.g. physical, virtual, augmented,
combined, and the researcher’s own preferences. For exam-
ple, STGT studies of virtual game worlds can be designed
with an objectivist approach where the game analytics are
used to collect objective metrics about the game (e.g. lives
lost, levels successfully cleared, time taken per level, choice
of actions and interactions). Similarly, STGT studies of com-
bined realities, such as development team environments,
can apply a mix of objective metrics and observations that
are interpreted subjectively.

RESEARCH CONTEXT

Research Method
Phenomena
Domain
Data, Tools & Techniques
Researcher

Socio-technical GT
(Hoda, 2020)

Socio-technical, with
interwoven social
and technical aspects
(e.g. ethics in AI).

Socio-technical, software engineering
(original), computer science, artiﬁcial
intelligence, human computer
interaction, information systems, and
other domains with varying levels of
social and technical interplay.

Socio-technical researcher/team,
with technical/domain
knowledge & relevant skills
in social sciences, philosophy,
qualitative research, & theory
development.

Qual data (primary), Quant data
(supplementary). Traditional e.g.
interviews, observations, and
Modern, e.g. data mining, NLP,
sentiment analysis, immersive
techniques.

Traditional GT methods
(Classic,
Strauss-Corbinian,
Constructivist)

Social, primary focus
on humans and social
interactions (e.g.
social loss).

Various, medicine (original), nursing,
psychology, education, attempted in
software engineering with varying
success.

Sociologist/team, with
knowledge and skills in social
sciences, philosophy,
qualitative research, and
theory development.

Qual data (primary), Quant data
(supplementary). Traditional, e.g.
interviews and observations.

PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS

Research Method
Reasoning
Ontology
Epistemology
Research Paradigm

Socio-Technical GT
(Hoda, 2020)

Inductive, deductive
& abductive

Context-speciﬁc, e.g.
physical, virtual,
combined, simulated.

Context speciﬁc, e.g.
subjective in natural settings,
objective in simulated world.

Context speciﬁc, e.g. constructivism in natural
and virtual worlds, positivism in simulated
worlds. Combinations possible.

Constructivist GT
(Charmaz, 2006)
Inductive &
abductive
Physical (original)
Subjective
Constructivism

Strauss-Corbinian GT
(Strauss & Corbin, 1990)
Inductive &
deductive
Physical (original)
Interpretive
Symbolic interactionism

Glaserian GT (Glaser &
Strauss, 1967)
Inductive (& hints of
deductive)
Physical (original)
Objective (original)
Positivism

METHODOLOGICAL STEPS AND PROCEDURES

Research Method
Literature Review
Data Collection
Data Analysis & Theory Development

Socio-Technical GT
(Hoda, 2020)

Lean literature review,
Targeted literature review.

All is data, with care – qual. primary (quan.
supplement) from credible sources with
ethical considerations, using traditional &
modern approaches via different sampling
initially & theoretical sampling later.

Basic Stage – open coding, constant comparison,
basic memoing. Advanced Stage – advanced
memoing and option (1) Emergent mode (targeted
coding, constant comparison, theoretical structuring)
or option (2) Structured mode (structured coding,
constant comparison, theoretical integration).

Constructivist GT
(Charmaz, 2006)
Customised literature
review.
Variety of elicited and extant qual. data via
initial & theoretical sampling.
Initial coding, focused coding, theoretical coding.

Strauss-Corbinian GT
(Strauss & Corbin, 1990)
Multiple & extensive use
of literature review.
Variety of primarily qual. data via
theoretical (open, relational, discriminate)
sampling.

Open coding, constant comparison, axial & selective
coding, memoing, sorting.

Glaserian GT (Glaser &
Strauss, 1967)
Avoid literature reviews in
same area.
All is data – qual. primary (quant. possible)
using interviews & observations via
theoretical sampling.

Open coding, constant comparison, selective coding,
memoing, theoretical sorting, theoretical coding.

EVALUATION GUIDELINES

Research Method
Evaluating Method Application
Evaluating Partial Findings
Evaluating Mature Theories

Socio-Technical GT
(Hoda, 2020)

Credibility, rigour
Originality, relevance, density
Novelty, usefulness, parsimony, modiﬁability

Constructivist GT
(Charmaz, 2006)
-
-
Credibility, originality, resonance, usefulness

Strauss-Corbinian GT
(Strauss & Corbin, 1990)
Sampling, major categories, indicators,
theoretical sampling, hypotheses,
discrepancies, core category

-
Concepts, categories, and links generation,
variation, process reliability, signiﬁcance

Glaserian GT (Glaser &
Strauss, 1967)
-
-
Fit, work, relevance, modiﬁability

on pragmatism and symbolic interactionism underpinnings
(Strauss and Corbin; 1990).

5
STGT METHOD – OVERVIEW AND BASIC STAGE

These next sections present an overview of the Socio-
Technical
Grounded
Theory
method
and
describe
its
methodological steps and procedures. Further details of
the STGT method introduced in this article can be found
in the author’s forthcoming book. Example applications of
speciﬁc steps and procedures (e.g. open coding, memoing)
are referenced throughout.

5.1
STGT – An Overview

STGT Research Paradigms

Fig. 2: Socio-Technical Grounded Theory Method – key stages (two large blocks of basic and advanced stages, labelled at
the top), steps and procedures (middle) including options of emergent and structured modes of theory development, and
the progressively emerging outcomes (bottom row)

.

The term development here is used for theory generation
or creation. Emerging categories and hypotheses can be
reported as interim and mature theory as ﬁnal ﬁndings.

Figure 2 presents a visual model or diagram of the
socio-technical
grounded
theory
method
including
its
key stages, depicted within two large blocks of basic and
advanced stages (labelled at the top), steps and procedures
(middle row) including options of emergent or structured
modes of theory development, and outcomes progressively
emerging from the steps (bottom row).

5.2
Literature Review

STGT offers two types of literature reviews, lean literature re-
view and targeted literature review, at the basic and advanced
stages of the research project respectively.

Basic stage – Data Collection and Analysis (DCA),
involving the steps of lean literature review, study preparation
and piloting, and iterations of basic data collection and analysis.
Initial concepts and categories start to emerge from the
piloting (see bottom row of the model diagram). The
development of a few strong categories and preliminary
hypotheses mark the end of the basic stage.

• Lean
literature
review
(LLR), a lightweight and
high-level review performed early in the study, during
the basic stage, to identify research gaps and motivate
the need for a study. An LLR may identify that the
topic is relatively nascent, with no or few existing
theories, and can beneﬁt from an original theory in
the area. Alternatively, it may identify that the topic is
extensively studied but lacks theories, or the existing
theories do not resonate with practical experience (from
reading practitioner literature or personal experience
as a practitioner in the ﬁeld). A GT study in the latter
case should be attempted by experienced theorists.
Where an LLR identiﬁes robust existing theories on the
topic, changing or reﬁning the topic is suggested.

Advanced stage – Theory Development, involving targeted
literature review as and when needed, and selecting from two
modes of theory development:

• Emergent mode, enabling the emergence of theory
through the iterative targeted data collection and analysis
step which ends with theoretical saturation and result-
ing in a mature theory that is integrated. The theory
can be further structured using theoretical presentation
templates during theoretical structuring.

5.3
Study Preparation and Piloting

In preparation for an STGT study, as with most other
studies, the researcher(s) needs to select a research topic,
a research team, prepare the study protocols, conduct pilot
data collection and analysis, and apply necessary reﬁne-
ments. The research team will beneﬁt from including an
experienced theorist as a core member or advisor but can
also be comprised of members new to theory development,
following these STGT guidelines.
Depending on the data collection techniques envisioned,
an initial set of research protocols in the form of recruitment
strategies, semi-structured interview questions, online sur-
veys or questionnaires, observation protocols, and modern
data mining techniques can be designed. An ethical assess-
ment should be conducted, and if applicable, approved by
an ethics committee. Once approved, a handful of pilot data
collection and analysis instances can be carried out. For ex-
ample, new researchers will beneﬁt from one or two pilots to
test the study protocols followed by necessary reﬁnements,
and two or three others to enable familiarity with data
collection and analysis procedures. Experienced researchers
will also gain from piloting as each topic presents new
contexts and challenges.
Data collected as part of piloting can be used in the
study unless the piloting was done in contexts different
to the actual study (e.g. piloting a survey with research
students where the study focuses on industry practitioners)
or the protocols needed to be completely redesigned,
including changing the research topic, as can happen in
rare instances.

Systematic Reviews. Formal and comprehensive literature
reviews popular in SE, such as systematic literature reviews
(SLR) and mapping studies (Kitchenham; 2004), are not
recommended for novice researchers, those new to research
in general or those new to GT. However, these are not
overruled for experienced researchers. Systematic reviews
and mapping studies primarily apply a positivist paradigm,
aiming for completeness, replication of the process, and
reproducibility of the results. Where a systematic review
is performed in/with an STGT study, the onus is on the
researcher(s) to be aware of, manage, and explain the
interplay between an SLR’s inherent positivist stance and
the stance adopted for the STGT study. They also need to
explain the relationship between the ﬁndings of the SLR
and the subsequent original STGT ﬁndings. For example,
if applying an emergent mode of theory development, it
is important that the researcher(s) explain the role of the
systematic review with regards to (a) the mechanisms used
to avoid being biased by the review ﬁndings, if using a
positivist approach or (b) how it informed the construction
of the theory, if using a constructivist approach. On the
other hand, the themes or taxonomies derived from the
systematic review can be used to drive a structured mode
of theory development.

5.4
Basic Data Collection and Analysis

Basic data collection and
analysis (DCA) is an it-
erative step involving the
procedures of (theoretical)
sampling, basic data collec-
tion, basic data analysis, and
basic memoing.

6
STGT METHOD – ADVANCED THEORY DEVEL-

OPMENT

STGT acknowledges the challenges of the novice socio-
technical researcher in understanding each of the tradi-
tional sociological GT versions (Glaserian, Strauss-Corbinian,
Constructivist), differences between them, and selecting one
version upfront with no room for an easy switch or com-
bining of procedures from different versions later on. STGT
delays the decision making to an advanced stage where the
researcher has experienced basic data analysis procedures
and is in a position to understand and decide which mode
of advanced data analysis and theory development best
applies to their emergent ﬁndings.
In the advanced stage, STGT offers a choice of two
modes of theory development, emergent and structured, re-
sulting in mature, structured and integrated theories as
outcomes. Table 5 provides an overview of their differences
and commonalities. Both modes include targeted literature
review and theoretical sampling, as described earlier. Both
modes also have advanced memoing and theoretical saturation
in common, described next.

Advanced Memoing
Advanced memoing is common to both emergent and struc-
tured modes of theory development and involves careful
revisiting, reassessing, reﬁning, and comparing of memos.
Advanced memoing1 serves to conﬁrm and strengthen ex-
isting relationships, reject unsupported indicative relation-
ships, and establish new links between (sub)categories.
Reﬂections captured in memos help develop and solid-
ify emerging concepts and (sub)categories. When memos
are compared and related to one another, insights in the
form of possible links between different concepts and
(sub)categories start to emerge. Exploring these potential
links (aka hypotheses) requires abductive reasoning – propos-
ing the best possible explanation based on all available
evidence (see Table 3 – types of reasoning). As more evi-
dence is collected, it adds to the strength of the proposed
explanations and emerging links. Applying a socio-technical
approach to memoing ensures that the underlying data
encapsulates the full socio-technical research context and
the researcher can propose explanations based on socio-
technical knowledge and understanding. For example, a
memo may capture the varying levels of scrum master in-
volvement in team practices across multiple teams observed
and propose a relationship with the agile maturity of the
team where novice teams show more scrum master involve-
ment as compared to experienced agile teams. Such hypoth-
esis development requires not only an understanding of
the social relationships between the scrum master and the
team but also an understanding of the team’s socio-technical
practices, e.g. daily standup and pair programming, to grasp
the level of scrum master involvement to be expected as
compared to what is observed.

Basic Memoing
Basic memoing is the process of documenting the researcher’s
thoughts, ideas, and reﬂections on emerging concepts and
(sub)categories and evidence-based conjectures on possible
links between them. Memos can be in the form of written
notes, sketches, annotated images or photographs. While
voice and video recording can also be used, it is recom-
mended these are transcribed for ease of further comparison
and analysis in the advanced stage.
Memoing is an imperative procedure that distinguishes
STGT
from
other
qualitative
research
methods.
It
is
the
mechanism
through
which
researcher
reﬂection
is
systematically
documented
and
used
for
theory
development.
Examples
of
memos
can
be
found
in
(Hoda et al.; 2012a) and (Masood et al.; 2020a).

Emergent mode
Structured mode

Context
of Use
Broad phenomenon (e.g.
exploring agile project
management).

Narrow phenomenon (e.g.
investigating self-assignment
in practice).

Open coding applied widely
on broad phenomemon.
Open coding applied on
narrow phenomenon.
Basic stage ended with the
emergence of some strong
and some not so strong
(sub)categories and
indicative relationships.

Basic stage ended with the
emergence of clear set of
(sub)categories that form an
overarching structure.

limits
analysis
to
only
the
most
signiﬁcant
concepts
and
categories
arising
from
the
basic
stage.
However,
some
new categories can still emerge during targeted data
analysis. Advanced memoing ensures the links between
(sub)categories are strengthened.

Distinct
Steps
Iterations of targeted data
collection and analysis,
targeting most signiﬁcant
(sub)categories and
continuing to establish
relationships between them.

Iterations of structured data
collection and analysis,
focusing on saturating
individual (sub)categories
and ﬁrming up relationships
between them.

Theoretical structuring.
Theoretical integration.

Common
Steps
Targeted literature review, theoretical sampling, advanced mem-
oing, theoretical saturation.

Outcome
Structured and integrated theory or theories.

Theoretical Structuring

Once theoretical saturation is achieved, the researcher can
decide to present the theory as is, using the emergent struc-
ture. However, STGT recommends the researcher to perform
theoretical structuring by (a) exploring and identifying the
genre of theories that best ﬁts, e.g. process, taxonomy, de-
gree, strategies (Glaser; 1978), and (b) exploring if the emer-
gent theoretical structure naturally maps to a pre-existing
theoretical template, e.g. six C’s model, process template
with deﬁned stages and entry/exit indicators, and in case
of a good ﬁt, use the template to further structure their
theory. Theoretical structuring3 is an optional but highly
recommended procedure.
The theory of becoming agile is an example of presenting
a mature theory in its emergent structure, i.e. a bespoke
process model (Hoda and Noble; 2017). The theory was
classiﬁed under the genre of process theory since it explained
the process of software teams becoming agile teams but no
explicit pre-deﬁned structure was adopted. On the other
hand, in case of the theory of inadequate customer collaboration
(Hoda et al.; 2011), the pre-deﬁned six C’s theoretical template
was adopted at a late stage as a result of exploring Glaser’s
theoretical coding families and discovering a good ﬁt with
the six C’s template (Glaser; 1978).

Theoretical Saturation
When data collection reaches a point of diminishing re-
turns where further collection does not generate new or
signiﬁcantly add to existing concepts, categories, or insights,
the study has reached theoretical saturation. Practically, this
manifested as the last few data collection attempts (e.g. last
3-4 interviews) serving to verify the theory. The theory is
considered mature as it comprises of strongly supported
and dense categories and hypotheses.

6.1
Emergent Mode of Theory Development (Option 1)

The emergent mode allows the researcher to conduct further
rounds of iterative and interleaved data collection and anal-
ysis in a targeted manner. The emergent mode enables an
organic emergence of theory as recommended by Glaserian
GT (Glaser and Strauss; 1967). The emergent mode includes
iterations of targeted data collection and analysis ending
with theoretical saturation and followed by theoretical struc-
turing to derive mature theory.

Context of Use
Where the initial research phenomenon or topic was broad
(e.g. exploring agile project management (Hoda et al.; 2012a))
and open coding was applied extensively on the broad
level, the basic stage will likely lead to the emergence of
a number of (sub)categories, some stronger than others,
with indicative relationships emerging between them. In
this case, where a some strong categories and initial rela-
tionships have emerged but a clear theoretical structure is
not evident, the researcher can decide to proceed with an
emergent mode of theory development which relies on the
theoretical structure emerging progressively over time.

6.2
Structured Mode of Theory Development (Option 2)

The structured mode allows the researcher to conduct fur-
ther rounds of iterative and interleaved data collection and
analysis in a structured manner. The structured mode enables
structured development of theory as captured by the early
forms of Strauss-Corbinian GT (Strauss and Corbin; 1990).
The structured mode includes iterations of structured data
collection and analysis ending with theoretical saturation and
followed by theoretical integration to derive mature theory.

Context of Use
Where the initial research topic was relatively narrow
and well deﬁned (e.g. investigating self-assignment practice
(Masood et al.; 2020a)) and the data collection was focused
on well deﬁned facets of the topic, the basic stage can lead
to the emergence of a set of (sub)categories and a relatively
clear theoretical structure. In this case, it makes sense for
the researcher to proceed with a structured mode of theory
development.

7
STGT - APPLICATION, OUTCOMES, REPORTING

Socio-technical grounded theory can be applied in two
ways. First, as a full STGT method resulting in novel,
useful, parsimonious, and modiﬁable theories grounded in
evidence. And second, in a limited capacity as STGT for
data analysis, by applying its basic data analysis techniques,
within or alongside other research methods, producing
outcomes of original and relevant descriptive ﬁndings in
the form of key categories or preliminary hypotheses and
propositions. Figure 3 shows types of STGT applications
and associated possible outcomes. It is important that re-
searchers understand, select, and clearly present their ap-
plication approach and claim the appropriate outcomes and
reviewers evaluate relevant outcomes accordingly, using the
STGT Evaluation Guidelines (section 8).

Structured Data Collection
Data collection in the structured mode is driven by the-
oretical sampling, collecting data to progressively ﬁt, add,
strengthen, and saturate the concepts and (sub)categories al-
ready present in the guiding theoretical structure. It includes
reﬁnements of the data collection protocols to progressively
saturate existing categories and occasionally identify new
concepts that appear within the theoretical structure.

Structured Data Analysis

Data
analysis
in
the
structured mode involves
structured
coding
and
constant
comparison.
Structured
coding
is
similar
to
the
original
axial
coding
introduced
in (Strauss and Corbin;
1990) in that it applies
data
analysis
using
a
guiding
theoretical
structure
and
aims
to
identify
and
strengthen
the relationships between the key categories. Advanced
memoing ensures the links between (sub)categories are
strengthened.

7.1
Full STGT Method

Full STGT method refers to the application of the wider
STGT method guidelines beyond basic data collection and
analysis and including advanced stages of theory develop-
ment, ultimately resulting in mature theories (see Figure 2).
Full applications can be both standalone and as part of com-
bined studies within larger mixed methods frameworks that
apply other research methods, e.g. action research or survey
research, and/or are conducted as the research component of
research and development (R&D) projects.

Standalone STGT Studies

Fig. 3: Range of STGT Applications (clockwise from right): STGT in mixed methods, STGT in R&D studies, STGT as part
of large projects or programs, large STGT study, small STGT study. MSR stands for mining software repositories.

knowledge in the form of practical guidelines and recommen-
dations (e.g. as seen in Masood et al. (2020a), Masood et al.
(2020b), and Shastri et al. (2021b).)
Standalone STGT studies can vary in scale. They can
take the form of small studies that address narrow research
topics, e.g. impact of human values on software design decisions,
mob programming techniques, or the use of coupling and cohesion
in microservices design, the last derived from a Twitter post
by Grady Booch. They are conducted over a relatively small
duration of time, e.g. six to eighteen months, typically by a
single researcher or a team of researchers. Small standalone
STGT studies are likely to result in one mature theory, usu-
ally presented in a single publication, although preliminary
and partial results can be reported along the way.
They can also take the form of large scale studies that
address broad research topics, e.g. role of ethics in artiﬁcial
intelligence, future of work in a post pandemic world, and
digital equity for the elderly. A comprehensive treatment of
such topics requires several years, typically by a team of
researchers. A standalone STGT study conducted as a part
of a PhD program, typically three to four years in length,
is an example of a large-scale STGT study. These are likely
to result in multiple theories, usually published as multiple
articles. How the multiple theories ‘hang together’ is usually
detailed in the thesis report and should be brieﬂy explained
in individual articles with cross-reference to related articles.

problem space, leading to the development of highly relevant
and customised solutions. For example, a small scale STGT
study can be conducted as a ﬁrst step to establish theoretical
foundations, explain the problem in depth, and/or devise
taxonomies followed by wider validation and/or tools de-
velopment. Outcomes in these cases are expected to be what
Storey et al. (2020) refer to as descriptive knowledge from the
STGT research part that then ideally feed into or lead to the
development of solutions, e.g. tools, techniques, platforms,
from the application of other methods or in the development
component of the R&D project.

7.2
STGT for Data Analysis

7.4
Reporting STGT

Where a researcher has applied the full STGT method
rigorously and produced outcomes in the form of dense
categories and supported relationships between them, they
can and should claim and present it as a mature theory.
The mature theory, whether developed using an emergent
or structured mode, is ready for reporting. Because of the
size and density of a mature theory, it is best presented in
a journal, thesis, or book format which allows for enough
room to explain all its constituent parts in detail. However, a
mature theory can also be presented in a shorter format such
as a conference paper in a highly condensed form with an
overarching view of the phenomenon (e.g. theory of becoming
agile (Hoda and Noble; 2017)).
Feedback on emerging concepts, categories, and hy-
potheses is also important, both from the practitioner and
research communities to assess and improve relevance and
rigour respectively. STGT researchers can submit partial
results in the form of an emerging or saturated (sub)category
or categories, or preliminary theory to research workshops,
conferences, and journals. In doing so, they should note
the paper reports on a speciﬁc (sub)category or preliminary
theory. Where a number of papers are prepared resulting
from the same underlying study, which can easily happen
with large STGT studies, they should present a high level
overview of the larger study and how the different pa-
pers relate to each other. Similarly, the overarching STGT
application, e.g. as a full STGT study, should be explained
while clarifying parts being reported. STGT researchers are
strongly recommended to present their emerging ﬁndings
to practitioner groups, including both their participants
and others not related to the study, to receive feedback
on how well they resonate with practice. Peer review and
practitioner feedback help identify theoretical gaps and can
further guide theory development.

7.3
Ethical Concerns

8
STGT – EVALUATION GUIDELINES

Method
Application
Partial ﬁndings or
Preliminary theory
Mature theory

Credibility,
Rigour
Originality,
Relevance, space
Density

Novelty,
Usefulness,
Parsimony,
Modiﬁability

8.1
Evaluating STGT Method Application

The research method is the bridge that connects the study
aims to its outcomes. When a manuscript is submitted for
review, it invites the reviewers to cross that bridge. If the
methodology bridge is assessed as shaky or unreliable,
it will raise concerns about the robustness of the study
and trustworthiness of its outcomes. Conversely, exemplar
studies include sufﬁcient method application details (see
Table 1). A well done STGT study will display and can be
evaluated on two overarching criteria – credibility and rigour.

• Credibility.
Method application details provide evidence of clear under-
standing and effective application. Referring to or restating
method guidelines is not enough. How those guidelines
were practically applied in the study should be described,
preferably including examples of application, to establish
credibility.

– How were participants recruited?
– What initial sampling technique was applied?
– How was iterative and interleaved data collection and
analysis ensured?
– How were memos written and used?
For manuscripts presenting mature theories, additional in-
formation should be provided.

8.2
Evaluating STGT Outcomes

STGT outcomes vary in nature. Partial ﬁndings (e.g. one
category being reported in-depth) or preliminary theories (e.g.
emerging hypotheses, propositions) result from the basic
stage of a full STGT study or the limited application of STGT
for data analysis with other methods. Mature theories result
as ﬁnal outcomes of full STGT studies. Different outcomes
cannot be evaluated using a one-size-ﬁts-all checklist.

– How was theoretical sampling applied?
– How were the research protocols reﬁned through the
iterations?
– Which mode of theory development was applied, emer-
gent or structured?
– How was theoretical saturation achieved?
– What ontological and epistemological stances were
used and why?
Depending on the ontological and epistemological stances,
credibility may be assessed through additional criteria, e.g.
replicability and reproducibility for positivist studies.
Lack of space in the manuscript is often cited as a
justiﬁcation for missing application details. Prioritising and
treating the research methodology section as a ﬁrst class
citizen in the manuscript will enable enough room to discuss
these aspects. Alternatively, supplementary materials can
be used to add to the basic details covered in the manuscript.

Partial outcomes and preliminary theories should exhibit
originality, relevance, and density.

• Originality.
Because an STGT study is purpose designed and executed,
it is highly likely to produce original outcomes. Where
originality is questioned, say because of how the outcomes
map to or resemble existing research theories or practitioner
models,
originality
should
be
demonstrated
through:
(a) evidence of a purpose-designed and executed STGT
study and practical steps taken to avoid biases arising
from personal researcher backgrounds and explaining
possible interplay between the resulting theory and related
practitioner literature and pre-existing theories, in case of
a positivist stance or (b) discussion of potential biases and
particular perspectives and their role in the construction of
the theory, in case of a constructivist approach.

• Rigour.
Sharing sufﬁcient evidence of the underlying raw data, the
data analysis procedures, and research artefacts, including
evidence of theory development where applicable, within
the manuscript is both important and possible. Providing
enough and strong evidence helps establish both credibility
and rigour of application.

• Density.
Density refers to the depth or richness of categories. Density
is said to be achieved when a category is supported by
multiple concepts and properties that capture a range of
contexts and nuances. The descriptions of the categories
include multiple pertinent examples and evidence from the
underlying data. Categories derived from the application of
STGT are generally denser than from descriptive or thematic
analysis, reﬂecting the rigour of its data analysis procedures.

9
VISION AND NEW FRONTIERS

This article is an attempt to acknowledge, highlight, and
label the unique socio-technical research context of software
engineering and introduce Socio-Technical Grounded The-
ory (STGT). The philosophical, methodological, and eval-
uation guidelines of STGT presented in this article will
be particularly valuable to researchers who are new to
theory development, struggling to understand and apply
traditional GT methods, unaware or unclear about the dif-
ferent traditional GT versions and how to select one, unsure
if they want to conduct a full GT study or only use its
data analysis techniques, and unsure how to present and
evaluate preliminary, partial, and mature ﬁndings of GT
studies to a high standard. As shown in Table 2, if applied
well, STGT can help address each of these challenges.
Conversely, STGT may not be applicable in all research
contexts. For example, where researchers are interested in
studying the social nature of a phenomenon and not in
its technical aspects, or where the phenomenon itself is
primarily social, the traditional sociological GT methods
may be better applicable.
In summary, the key contribution of this article are to,

Mature theories resulting from full STGT studies need to
be evaluated to higher standards, achieving the traits of
novelty (beyond originality), usefulness (beyond relevance),
parsimony (beyond density), and modiﬁability.

• Novelty.
Since the main aim of STGT is to develop new theories
instead of verifying existing ones, novelty is a key criterion
for evaluating a mature theory outcome. Novelty is said
to be achieved when the theory presents unprecedented
insights on a relatively under-researched phenomenon (e.g.
(Masood et al.; 2020a)) or a fresh approach to understanding
a well-studied phenomenon (e.g. (Hoda and Noble; 2017)).
In fact, novelty can be assumed as a default once credibility
and rigour of application are established. If a theory
is seen to have close resemblance to existing models
from research or practitioner sources, its novelty and the
role of relevant models/literature can be further scrutinised.

• Deﬁne socio-technical research, with its unique con-
text including – socio-technical phenomenon, domain and
actors, researcher, and research data, tools, & techniques
(detailed in section 4.1 and summarised in Figure 1).

• Usefulness.
Mature theories go beyond being relevant and resonating
with practice. They should provide actionable insights and
recommendations for practice and preferably for research.
Usefulness is said to be achieved when the possible
applications and implications for research and practice are
shared, e.g. (Hoda and Noble; 2017; Masood et al.; 2020a)

• Present Socio-technical Grounded Theory (STGT)
guidelines, including its unique socio-technical research
context (as above), philosophical foundations (section
4.2 and Table 3), methodological steps and procedures
(detailed in sections 5 and 6, and summarised in ‘ 2 and
Tables 4 and 5), guidelines on application, outcomes,
and reporting (detailed in section 7 and captured in
Figure 3) and evaluation guidelines (section 8 and Table
6).
The concepts introduced in this article push research bound-
aries into new frontiers in many ways.

• Beyond theory development: STGT encourages differ-
ent levels of application, including full STGT study for
theory development and STGT for data analysis, applied
in a standalone capacity or in combination with other
methods, as part of R&D studies or large programs.

• Beyond local theories: Grounded theories are widely
acknowledged to be local in application. While univer-
sality is not an aim or quality criteria of STGT stud-
ies, the relevance and generalisability of theories can
be improved to cover a greater variety of underlying
contexts, up to a point without losing contextual nu-
ances, through the use of modern sources of data (e.g.
GitHub, StackOverﬂow, Twitter), modern approaches
to data collection (e.g. mining software repositories)
and analysis (natural language processing, sentiment
analysis) that make it possible to strengthen, deepen,
and expand the scale of grounded theories.

• Beyond manual theory development: Further advance-
ments in technology and artiﬁcial intelligence offers
unexplored potential in supplementing, augmenting,
and automating parts of qualitative data analysis to
ease human effort and improve both the quality and
scale of theory development.

• Beyond human learning: Developing theories helps
build collective human knowledge and propel human
learning. However, the fundamental systematic and
rigorous steps and procedures of the STGT method,
i.e. identifying patterns, insights, and relationships
through constant comparison across datasets, can also
be potentially harnessed as approaches to guide ma-
chine and deep learning in AI-based systems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I sincerely thank Margaret-Anne Storey, Philippe Kruchten,
John Grundy, Klaas-Jan Stol, Christoph Treude, Zainab Ma-
sood, Steve Adolph, Ingo Mueller, and Johannes Berglind
S¨oderqvist for providing their thoughtful and invaluable
feedback on the drafts. I am also grateful to James Noble
and George Allan for their guidance in the early days of
my GT journey. I acknowledge the invaluable contributions
of Barney Glaser, Anselm Strauss, Juliet Corbin, and Kathy
Charmaz to the Grounded Theory research community.

REFERENCES

Rashina Hoda is an Associate Professor of Soft-
ware Engineering in the Faculty of Information
Technology at Monash University, Melbourne.
Rashina specialises in use of Grounded The-
ory in Software Engineering. Rashina received
a distinguished paper award for her grounded
theory of becoming agile at the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering,
ICSE2017. She serves on the Review Board of
the IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
and the Advisory Board of the IEEE Software.
She presented a Technical Brieﬁng on “decoding grounded theory for
software engineering” at ICSE2021. Rashina is currently writing a book
detailing the Socio-Technical Grounded Theory method introduced in
this article. For more information visit: