RHNAS: Realizable Hardware and Neural
Architecture Search

Yash Akhauri*
Intel Labs, India
Adithya Niranjan*
Intel Labs, India
J. Pablo Muñoz
Intel Labs, USA
Suvadeep Banerjee
Intel Labs, USA

arXiv:2106.09180v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jun 2021

Abhijit Davare
Intel Labs, USA
Pasquale Cocchini
Intel Labs, USA
Anton A. Sorokin
Intel Labs, USA
Ravi Iyer
Intel Labs, USA

Nilesh Jain
Intel Labs, USA

Abstract

The rapidly evolving ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence necessitates automated ap-
proaches to co-design neural network architecture and neural accelerators to max-
imize system efﬁciency and address productivity challenges. To enable joint
optimization of this vast space, there has been growing interest in differentiable
NN-HW co-design. Fully differentiable co-design has reduced the resource re-
quirements for discovering optimized NN-HW conﬁgurations, but fail to adapt to
general hardware accelerator search spaces. This is due to the existence of non-
synthesizable (invalid) designs in the search space of many hardware accelerators.
To enable efﬁcient and realizable co-design of conﬁgurable hardware accel-
erators with arbitrary neural network search spaces, we introduce RHNAS.
RHNAS is a method that combines reinforcement learning for hardware op-
timization with differentiable neural architecture search. RHNAS discovers
realizable NN-HW designs with 1.84× lower latency and 1.86× lower energy-
delay product (EDP) on ImageNet and 2.81× lower latency and 3.30× lower
EDP on CIFAR-10 over the default hardware accelerator design.

1
Introduction

The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in ﬁelds such as computer vision, recommender systems,
and virtual reality is driving an exponential increase in deployment scenarios for deep learning (DL)
systems. This success has also been driven by larger, compute-intensive models. These large models
have higher latency and energy costs - one of the primary hurdles in developing effective artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) systems. To meet the increasing engineering and deployment requirements needed
to optimize AI systems, there has been a shift to utilizing automated neural architecture search
techniques [1, 2, 3], as well as automated hardware optimization [4, 5]. While HW-Aware ML on
ﬁxed hardware does improve efﬁciency, this is often sub-optimal for conﬁgurable accelerators. Such
accelerators present signiﬁcant space for improvement through optimization on components such as
number of processing elements, buffer sizes, and data-types, among others. Fixing the NN architecture
and optimizing the HW design also leaves performance on the table - different accelerators have
different modes of operations and optimizations. Therefore, an optimal layer choice for a given
accelerator may not be the best choice for another. To model these inter-dependencies, there has been
growing interest in evolutionary algorithm-based [6], reinforcement learning-based methods [7, 8, 9],
as well as fully differentiable methods [10, 11] to co-design both hardware accelerators and neural
network architectures.

Fully differentiable approaches often introduce HW parametrization to represent HW design choices.
While some accelerators are fully parametrizable, several of them are sparsely valid. Sparse validity
can have many reasons, be it Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) limitations, arbitrary constraints in
synthesizable designs or NN-HW interactions. In the context of developing HW accelerators and
compiler stacks, such issues with validity can arise quite often during early stages of development.
Reducing this sparsity can take considerable veriﬁcation and development efforts, delaying product
and innovation life-cycles. We therefore feel that the assumption of fully parametrizable/valid
spaces design spaces to be fairly restrictive and hope to address some of these issues with our work.
Optimizing on sparsely valid spaces is a strictly harder problem than having non-differentiable
hardware costs, as no hardware cost exists for non-realizable designs. We discuss the difﬁculty of
co-design in sparsely valid spaces in more detail in Section 3. For the remainder of this paper, we use
non-realizable and invalid hardware designs to refer to choices that are not synthesizable.

In this paper, we look into ﬁnding a realizable solution in two aspects.
First, ﬁnding opti-
mal yet synthesizable designs in the hardware accelerator space. Second, proposing a way of
co-discovering NN-HW designs with reasonable run-time and compute requirements by leveraging
differentiable neural architecture search, something that is becoming increasingly important
considering the carbon impact of AI [12]. For example, BestOB [7] utilizes a RL controller for
co-design and requires 1000 GPU hours to co-design NN-HW on the CIFAR-100 dataset.

We propose a method that integrates a reinforcement learning-based hardware optimizer with dif-
ferentiable neural architecture search. This method allows us to efﬁciently explore a prohibitively
large NN-HW joint space with non-differentiable hardware costs and sparsely valid hardware designs.
With these improvements, we co-design NN-HW on the ImageNet dataset in 186.7 GPU hours
and 4 GPU hours on the CIFAR-10 dataset. In this paper, we discuss the following contributions:

1. We introduce RHNAS, an NN-HW co-design method that integrates RL-based hardware
optimizers with differentiable NAS. Our method successfully overcomes the challenges
associated with sparse validity - a failure point for existing differentiable co-design works.
It does so with minimal overhead to a standard DNAS solution.

2. We benchmark our RL-based hardware optimizer and use Bayesian hyperparameter opti-
mization to identify the best hyper-parameters for a fair study of a range of standard RL
algorithms (PPO, A2C, DQN) [13, 14, 15].

3. We empirically verify that using fully differentiable approaches to co-design does not aid
in discovering valid hardware accelerator designs. We benchmark our RL-based hardware
optimizer against a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) based hardware generator [11]. Fur-
ther, we study the convergence of differentiable algorithms which learn optimal hardware
parametrizations [10] on our HW accelerator search space.

2
Related Work

Hardware-aware NAS - Early efforts towards the discovery of NN architectures primarily focused on
optimizing accuracy using reinforcement learning (RL) and evolutionary algorithms (EA) [16, 17, 18].
These algorithms generally require considerable computational resources and need to evaluate and
train many candidate architectures to completion. Differentiable NAS strategies were introduced
to reduce the cost of discovering efﬁcient neural networks [19, 2]. Most of the early focus was
on maximizing accuracy, which leads to very large neural networks with high latency and energy
requirements. To address these demanding requirements, many works [3, 20, 21, 22, 23] model the
latency, ﬂoating-point operations, or other performance-related metrics as regularizers to guide NAS.

Hardware design optimization - DNN accelerators [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29] have been developed
with the prospect of potential gains over general-purpose hardware. Eyeriss is an energy-efﬁcient
CNN accelerator [30] that delivered 10 times the energy efﬁciency over mobile GPUs. Such im-
provements lead to further research in novel microarchitectures and data ﬂow styles. To get the best
performance on a range of workloads, many accelerators are being designed for conﬁgurability based
on the selected workload. This results in many possible hardware resource assignments dictated
by the NN topology to be deployed. Several approaches have been proposed to identify optimal
resource assignments, e.g., ConfuciuX [5], GAMMA [4], MARVEL [31] utilize RL and GA (Genetic
Algorithms) to decide the hardware resource assignment for a given workload.

Hardware-Neural Network Co-design - While NAS and HW design optimization give good results
when applied standalone, the signiﬁcant inter-dependencies between NN and HW components suggest
an opportunity for improvement by jointly modeling NN topologies and HW designs. DANCE [11]
introduces an MLP based HW generator along with a differentiable performance estimator to guide
the joint differentiable search. DNA [10] converts the hardware and neural network design space into
a categorical probability distribution and uses an MLP HW performance predictor for the co-design
of hardware and neural network. We ﬁnd that these fully differentiable solutions cannot adapt to
spaces that has many invalid hardware design choices. Some works propose an RL controller for
co-design [7, 32]. However, these works suffer from high search cost problems [11].

3
Conﬁgurable Hardware Accelerators and Sparsely Valid Design Spaces

We use the Versatile Tensor Accelerator (VTA) as our conﬁgurable hardware accelerator. VTA is a
programmable deep learning accelerator [33] with parametrizable architecture paired with Apache
TVM [34], a deep learning compiler stack. This integrated end-to-end deep learning stack provides
a ﬂexible platform to implement our NN-HW co-design framework. The VTA HW is designed
in Constructing Hardware in a Scala Embedded Language (CHISEL) [35] that facilitates full
parametrization where underlying memory elements can be programmatically customized for the HW
backend (ASIC/FPGA), but the hardware designer also retains the ability to reuse existing hardware
components. The CHISEL ﬂow generates HW modules expressed in register-transfer language (RTL),
which can be used for downstream ASIC/FPGA synthesis. The TVM framework utilizes a HW
simulation guided schedule auto-tuning platform known as autoTVM [36] for computing optimal
data access patterns in adaptation to changes in the workload and HW conﬁgurations. Details on how
we calculate latency and energy-delay product (EDP) are provided in the appendix.

For this work, we have modiﬁed the TVM compiler to utilize an analytical bandwidth minimization
technique to compute the optimal tiling scheme of NN operator schedules rapidly. In addition, we
have extended the TVM-VTA stack to support depth-wise convolutions to allow simulation of our NN
search space. Table 1 shows the HW architecture parameters we have considered and their possible
values (in log2 scale). The product of block_in and block_out decides the size of the GEMM core of
the accelerator, the input (Inp), weight (Wgt), and accumulator (Acc) buffers are on-chip SRAMs,
µOp width deﬁnes the size of the RISC micro-ops, and the µOp buffer deﬁnes the size of the micro-op
cache.

While independent consideration of each architectural parameter
in Table 1 leads to a large theoretical design space (32768 possible
conﬁgurations), many parameter combinations are invalid. This is
a common problem on hardware accelerators. On VTA, it is due to
ISA restrictions. For example, large compute cores and local mem-
ory buffers can improve accelerator performance, but the number of
bits required to address such cores/buffers may exceed the instruc-
tion width, thus limiting the scope of joint architectural parameter
exploration. Another issue involves hardware resource limitations.
For example, FPGA targets may lack the SRAM required, or ASIC
synthesis may not reach the speciﬁed frequency. There can also exist
arbitrary points in the parameter space which are not synthesizable
due to routing congestion of larger designs. While such designs are
within the parameter space, it is not possible to realize them. As
conﬁgurable accelerators may have invalid parameter choices, we
implement a validity checker function that analytically detects whether a hardware design is valid.

Table 1:
VTA parameter
ranges (log2).

HW Feature
Range

block_in
[3, 6]
block_out
[3, 6]
µOp Width (bits)
[5, 6]
µOp Buffer (kB)
[5, 6]
Inp Buffer (kB)
[13, 20]
Wgt Buffer (kB)
[13, 20]
Acc Buffer (kB)
[13, 20]

4
The RHNAS Flow

4.1
Proposed Co-Exploration

We introduce an RL HW optimizer whose training is disentangled from differentiable NAS to address
the dual problem of sparsely valid hardware design space and high NN architecture search cost
associated with RL and EA-based NAS algorithms. Figure 1 shows an overview of our RHNAS
ﬂow. Our differentiable NAS algorithm samples neural network architectures from a super-net.

Figure 1: Overall RHNAS ﬂow diagram

This sampling is done from a super-net using a categorical architectural distribution. We use a
pre-trained RL HW optimizer to generate an optimized accelerator conﬁguration for the sub-sampled
NN architecture. For every NN architecture sampled during the differentiable neural architecture
search process, the RL HW optimizer receives the subsampled NN architecture along with a default
HW accelerator conﬁguration template and outputs an optimized HW accelerator conﬁguration. A
performance predictor is then used to get the performance of the optimized NN-HW design. This
performance is used as a regularizer in the differentiable NAS minimization objective.

RHNAS’s optimization is formulated as shown in
Table 2. σ is the Softmax function. α is the contin-
uous variable parametrization of the NN architecture.
σ(α) is the categorical probability distribution of
the NN supernet. Zα,θ is the one-hot representation
of the subnetwork sampled using the σ(α) and θ
weights. HWOpt is the RL HW optimizer. H0 is
the template HW accelerator conﬁguration that the
HWOpt is initially provided with. If HWOpt gener-
ates an invalid accelerator conﬁguration, it simply outputs the template HW accelerator conﬁguration
H0. Lhw is the HW cost loss determined by the NN-HW Performance Predictor (e.g., Clock Cycles,
Energy-Delay-Product) and is used to guide the neural architecture search.

Table 2: RHNAS’s Optimization

min
α,θ Ltrain(Zα,θ) + λLhw(σ(α), Hopt)

s.t.
Lhw = PerfPredictor(σ(α), Hopt)
s.t.
Hopt = HWOpt(σ(α), H0)

As indicated in Table 2, we use the NN architecture categorical distribution σ(α) instead of the
sub-sampled one-hot representation Zα,θ for the HW loss. In our tests, using the one-hot architectural
choice Zα,θ in Table 2 leads to noisy training, whereas σ(α) leads to smoother training as it is a
continuous probability distribution.

4.2
HW Performance Predictors

For any given accelerator conﬁguration and neural network architecture, the simulator takes signiﬁcant
time to output a performance metric, as seen in Table 4. For example, we need 2 minutes to get a
single cycle-accurate RTL simulation of an end-to-end ResNet50v2model. The large query time
makes computing HW metrics on the ﬂy impractical. Metrics such as FLOPs are not capable of
capturing the intricacies of the NN-HW design space, we ﬁnd that FLOPS are weakly correlated with
cycle count. To quantify this - the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient between cycle count and FLOPs
for 55420 randomly sampled NN-HW design choices was 0.15 (weakly positive correlation).

We use an MLP to avoid large query times and capture the relations between NN-HW designs and
performance. The MLP takes as input the joint NN-HW embedding and predicts the Latency/EDP.
As seen in Table 2, the NN embedding the MLP takes is a probability distribution (σ(α)) instead of a
one-hot encoding. We include a study in the appendix to validate that the performance predictor is
able to accurately interpolate between different discrete NN architectural choices.

4.3
Reinforcement Learning for HW Optimization

We use an RL agent to optimize over our sparsely valid hardware design space. The agent receives a
representation of the neural network (N) and an initial HW accelerator template (H0) of our accelera-

tor. The agent modiﬁes the accelerator conﬁguration to improve the NN-HW design latency/EDP.
In order to make the agent minimize the latency/EDP, we provide the negative of the predicted
latency/EDP as the reward. In a sparsely valid design space, optimizing only latency/EDP can lead to
invalid accelerator designs. To address this challenge, we penalize the agent with Cinv for providing
invalid accelerator design parameters. We study two intuitive settings based on this formulation:

Composite setting: In this formulation, we use a concatenated representation of the NN and HW
(N, Ht) as the environment state. The agent takes a discrete action that speciﬁes the whole HW
conﬁguration (Ht) every time step and runs for a ﬁxed number of timesteps tmax every episode. As
the composite agent provides a new hardware conﬁguration in each time step, it may lose incentive
to optimize a suboptimal accelerator conﬁguration due to penalty for invalid states. To encourage
continuous improvement, we introduce a penalty B imposed when the accelerator conﬁguration
the composite agent provides is worse than its previous accelerator conﬁguration (P(N, Ht) >
P(N, Ht−1).
Sequential setting: In this approach, the RL agent optimizes only one HW accelerator parameter in
a time step, making tmax passes in an episode. Here, we modify the state to include a one-hot vector
St to provide the agent context about which parameter to optimize. At each time step, the agent takes
a discrete action choice (H
p
t for the pth step). After the agent has generated an action for every HW
parameter (we have 7 parameters) tmax times, we get the ﬁnal HW conﬁguration. In this setting, we
found that providing a reward after generating a full template to be more stable than rewards at every
time-step.
We discuss implementation details of the agent and the state representation further in Section 5.2 and
the appendix.

Table 3: RL formulation. Ot, At, Rt are state, action and reward respectively
Composite setting
Sequential setting

Ot = (N, Ht);
Ot = (N, Ht, St);
At = (Ht)
At = (H
p
t )
s.t.
H
p
t ∈[0, 7]

⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

−P(N, Ht) −Cinv(Ht), if t = tmax
−B, if P(N, Ht) > P(N, Ht−1)
0, otherwise
Rt = {
−P(N, Ht) −Cinv(Ht), if S7 = 1
0, otherwise

Rt =

5
Evaluation of RHNAS Components

5.1
Performance Predictor Network

Our performance predictor network is a fully connected
neural network with 3 layers with 512 neurons in each
hidden layer and intermediate ReLU activation functions.
Table 4 shows the clock cycles, EDP and other simulation
metrics. We used the VTA simulator to randomly sample
53600 NN-HW pairs to generate our dataset. We train our
networks with the L1 loss between predicted and actual
performance. Our design space changes the buffer and
GEMM core sizes by powers of two. There can be a large
difference in the clock cycles for different NN-accelerator
designs. We found that the Robust Scaler normalization
from sklearn [37] works well on our data. Since we use
the performance predictor output to guide our search, it is
important that the ranking of different NN-HW architec-
ture pairs are preserved. To verify this, we use the Kendall rank correlation coefﬁcient (τ) [38] - a τ
of 1 indicates that the rank ordering is perfectly preserved. Since we ﬁnd that τ > 0.97, we conclude
that our predictors can be used in the RHNAS.

Table 4: Testing the predictor network
performance by measuring the Kendall
Tau rank correlation coefﬁcient. (τ)

Predictor Network
τ metric

EDP
0.982
Cycle Count
0.982
GEMM Cycle Count
0.984
µOp load (bytes)
0.975
Weight load (bytes)
0.985
Input load (bytes)
0.983
Accumulator load (bytes)
0.984

5.2
Hardware Optimizers

For the RL HW optimizer, we experimented with the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [13],
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) [14], and Deep Q-Network (DQN) [15] algorithms. We implemented
the composite and sequential action spaces and environments with the OpenAI gym environment and
use implementations of PPO, A2C and DQN algorithms from the stable-baselines3 library [39].

For the RL environment, we treat the valid-
ity penalty (Cinv), maximum timesteps (tmax),
and the intermediate penalty (B), as environ-
ment hyper-parameters. We found that tuning
these parameters carefully was key to ﬁnding
agents that generated both optimal and synthe-
sizable hardware conﬁgurations .For example,
for penalty values that were too low (Cinv <
1.5), the RL agent would generate very large
accelerator conﬁgurations, which do not ﬁt on
our target hardware. On the other hand, larger
penalties meant the agent would quickly stop at
a valid sub-optimal HW conﬁguration. Using
HPO (details in appendix), we were able to ﬁnd
agents that give near-optimal synthesisable con-
ﬁgurations. From Table 5, we observe that PPO [13] with the composite setting gives close to optimal
conﬁguration (∼99% optimal) for both cycle count and energy delay product (EDP) while generating
no invalid conﬁgurations

Table 5: Optimality of HW generated by RL HW
generators.

Cycle Count
Composite
Sequential

PPO
99.82%
99.79%
A2C
99.82%
56.51%
DQN
-
98.10%
EDP
Composite
Sequential

PPO
98.61%
97.56%
A2C
97.53%
44.05%
DQN
-
95.21%

5.2.1
Ablation Study on Hardware Optimizers

A recent work, DANCE [11] introduced an MLP based hardware generator. The data-set is generated
by sampling random NNs from the search space and using the output of a hardware generation toolkit
as the target HW. This toolkit uses exact algorithms such as exhaustive search or branch-and-bound
algorithms to output optimized HW conﬁgurations for an input NN. We reference this method as
Exhaustive-HWGEN in Table 6. In our tests, Exhaustive-HWGEN is a 3 layer MLP with 512 neurons
and is trained by taking a categorical cross entropy loss with respect to the optimal HW design for a
given NN architecture. The optimal HW design is found by exhaustive search. While this method
slightly exceeds the optimality of hardware generated by our reinforcement learning agents, it has
a signiﬁcantly larger training time for a general accelerator space because of the exhaustive search.
Exhaustive search is not practically feasible as accelerator designs get increasingly complex. If we
look at most accelerators, the search space is of the order of 1030 to 1070 [10, 5] choices, generating
the data-set for Exhaustive-HWGEN would be completely infeasible.

As an alternative to exhaustive search, we test
Perf-HWGEN, which is a hardware generator
akin to Exhaustive-HWGEN but with a training
procedure that does not require exhaustive enu-
meration. We utilize the performance predictor
MLP from Section 5.1 in our loss formulation
for the Perf-HWGEN hardware generator. Since
we are not using exhaustive enumeration as a
search strategy, we also have to penalize invalid
conﬁgurations given by the Perf-HWGEN. For
this purpose, we use ValidNet MLP. This MLP
indicates whether an input HW accelerator con-
ﬁguration is valid. Details on ValidNet MLP
architecture and training is provided in the appendix.

Table 6: Optimality of HW generated by MLP HW
generators.

Cycle Count
Optimality
% invalid

Exhaustive-HWGEN
99.9%
0%
Perf-HWGEN
N/A
100%
EDP
Optimality
% invalid

Exhaustive-HWGEN
99.4%
0.8%
Perf-HWGEN
N/A
100%

The training loss for Perf-HWGEN is formulated as,
min
β
Lhw(Z, Perf-HWGENβ(Z)) + λLvalid(Perf-HWGENβ(Z))
(1)

As indicated in Equation 1, the training objective of Perf-HWGEN is to jointly minimize the hardware
cost (Lhw) and validity loss (Lvalid). Z is a randomly sampled NN architecture and β are the

Table 7: RHNAS Ablation studies. EDP has been
normalized, Lat is Latency.

Table 8: Evaluating RHNAS with other co-
design works.

Target
Acc
Lat
EDP
ASIC
(%)
ms

Target
Latency
Area
Acc
ASIC
ms
(mm2)
(%)

DSNAS
74.4
22.13
28
HW Aware NAS
74.1
23.67
31
Sequential Optimization
74.2
13.54
17
RHNAS Lat
74.5
12.03
16
RHNAS EDP
74.5
12.73
15
RHNAS Lat+FLOPs
73.4
11.77
12
DSHWNAS
74.2
Invalid Design

DANCE
8.13
2.73
68.70
DNA 4bit
1.25
5.5
71.7
DNA 16bit
2.85
2.12
72.2
NHAS
1.58
5.87
70.74
EDD
11.15
-
74.7
RHNAS
12.03
1.21
74.5

parameters of Perf-HWGEN. If λ = 0, there is no penalty for invalid conﬁgurations. In such cases,
the Perf-HWGEN generates invalid conﬁgurations by merely maximizing the performance.

Our Perf-HWGEN uses the Lvalid loss to guide the search for valid conﬁgurations. We sweep
λ ∈[10−4, 102] but do not converge to a Perf-HWGEN that generates valid conﬁguration. We
study the behavior of ValidNet in guiding search for valid hardware conﬁgurations in Section 6.4.
It is also important to note that the performance predictor network has only been trained on valid
conﬁgurations, thus the optimality numbers for Perf-HWGEN are not reliable, and labeled as Not
Applicable (N/A) in Table 6 for invalid conﬁgurations.

6
RHNAS Evaluation

For our neural architecture search strategy, we employ
the super-net and choice of blocks as used in the released
implementation of DSNAS [2]. Our NN architecture sam-
pling, hyper-parameter settings and parameter update strat-
egy is the same as DSNAS [2]. DSNAS introduces a
task-speciﬁc direct neural architecture search without pa-
rameter retraining. DSNAS requires 420 GPU hours to
discover networks with accuracy comparable to two-stage
(search and train) methods. As we train on an NVIDIA
V-100 GPU, we complete the search in 187 GPU hours.

Table 9: Comparing against other efﬁ-
cient neural networks.

Target
Latency
Acc
ASIC
ms
(%)

MNASNet-1
17.31
75.20
MobileNetV2
12.16
71.66
RHNAS
12.03
74.5

We have conducted several experiments on RHNAS using
the ImageNet (ILSVRC2012) [40] and CIFAR-10 [41] data-sets. We include in our evaluation
three ASIC baselines: DANCE [11], DNA [10] and NHAS [6]. Due to differences in accelerator
designs and the neural network backbone, it is not feasible to fairly compare the latency and EDP
without further standardization. The HW metrics for different works are largely different based on
the capabilities and optimization of the accelerators. We draw the attention of the reader to the fact
that DNA cannot discover valid designs on our hardware search space, and is studied in detail by our
DSHWNAS test in Table 7 and Section 6.4. The MLP-based hardware generator in DANCE has been
studied in Section 5.2.1. DANCE can work on our hardware design space by exhaustive enumeration,
which is not a scalable approach as the complexity of hardware accelerators increase. To address the
lack of standardization across accelerators, we deploy MNASNet-1 [42] and MobileNetV2 [42] on
the same VTA accelerator as discovered by RHNAS Latency in Table 9. We also demonstrate the
effectiveness of RHNAS, by implementing HW-Aware NAS and NN-HW sequential optimization
methods on our accelerator search space as shown in Table 7. All our networks have been quantized
to 8 bits.

6.1
RHNAS on CIFAR-10

To demonstrate the effectiveness of RHNAS in discovering solutions with low latency and high
accuracy, we use a smaller variant of the DSNAS network with 9 layers instead of 20 layers and
try to ﬁnd good HW-NN pairs on the smaller network. There are 49 = 262144 neural networks
in our CIFAR-10 search space. We randomly sample 45 neural networks and train them using

the DSNAS [2] SPOSretrain240 strategy detailed in the appendix along with more experimental
details. We measure the latency of these neural networks on the default VTA accelerator conﬁguration
and are represented by "Random NN Sampling w/ Default HW". We then measure the latency of
these neural networks on the optimized HW accelerator design generated by the RL HW Optimizer
referenced as "Random NN Sampling w/ Optimized HW". Sequential Optimization refers to a method
where we ﬁrst optimize the neural network architecture for accuracy, and use the RL HW Optimizer
to generate the hardware accelerator design for the neural network. We also include HW-Aware
NAS, which attempts to ﬁnd an optimal neural network architecture on the default HW accelerator
design. As seen from Figure 2, RHNAS designs outperform all other methods provided in the ﬁgure.

6.2
Hardware-Aware NAS

In Hardware-Aware NAS, we try to minimize
cycle count and EDP without a HW optimizer in
the loop. As described by Equation 2, we utilize
the default HW conﬁguration and optimize the
NN parametrization on the ﬁxed HW. RHNAS
ﬁnds solutions with 1.97× lower latency and
2.07× lower EDP with a 0.4% accuracy gain on
ImageNet and 2.81× lower latency and 3.30×
lower EDP on CIFAR-10.

Figure 2: RHNAS discovers efﬁcient NN-HW
choices that give high accuracy on CIFAR-10.

min
α,θ Ltrain(Zα,θ) + λLhw(σ(α), H0)
(2)

6.3
Sequential Optimization

One of the primary points of comparison for a joint search algorithm is to benchmark with sequential
optimization algorithms. Since our RL HW optimizer agent is disentangled from the NN architecture
search, we can take the resultant network from the NAS algorithm with no simulation/FLOPs loss and
generate HW optimized for that topology. Further, we also simulate the original DSNAS algorithm on
our HW. As seen from Table 8, RHNAS Latency is able to ﬁnd a solution with 1.13× lower latency
for 0.1% higher accuracy on the ImageNet dataset and 1.5× lower latency on CIFAR-10 dataset.

6.4
Fully Differentiable Joint Search

Several works [10, 11] introduce a fully differentiable approach to NN-HW co-design. While these
works produce excellent results in accelerator design spaces with sparse optimas, we attempt to repro-
duce a generalized fully differentiable search algorithm as shown in Equation 3 and demonstrate its
inability to navigate our sparsely valid accelerator design space. Our joint differentiable architecture
search is formulated below. We use the same Lvalid as described in Equation 1.

min
α,γ,θ Ltrain(Zα,θ) + λLhw(σ(α), γ) + βLvalid(γ)
(3)

As seen in Table 8, this DSHWNAS formulation converges with an accuracy of 74.2%,

but discovers an invalid HW design. We ran this
test with β = 10x for x ∈[−7, 7] but were not
able to converge to a valid HW choice. We suspect
that this is due to the irregular gradients given our
sparsely valid design space. We analyze the gradient
of our ValidNet model to understand this behaviour,
and observe that the gradients in proximity of invalid
design choices are smaller in magnitude than the
gradients around valid design choices. This may
mean the gradients are ineffective in navigating the design space with Lvalid given in Equation
3.

Table 10: Gradient Interpolation Study

∆j =
∂
∂̃
γj L1Loss(ValidNet(̃γ), 1)

̃γ = {
(1 −ϕ)v + (ϕ)r
∀ϕ ∈[0, 1)
(2 −ϕ)r + (ϕ −1)i ∀ϕ ∈[1, 2)

To study this, we measure the gradient to the HW
parametrization (input to the ValidNet) with respect
to a target output of 1 (where the HW parametriza-
tion is valid.). We smoothly interpolate the input HW
parametrization from a valid design (v) to a random
design (r) and ﬁnally to an invalid design (i). We
record the gradient magnitude to the HW parametriza-
tion. Explicitly, we convert the information in Table
(10) (δj) to a heat map in Figure 3. We smoothly
interpolate for ϕ ∈[0, 2) and use the resulting state
to fetch the gradients through ValidNet.

Figure 3: Gradient magnitudes when interpo-
lating from valid to invalid.

As evident in Figure 3, the gradients are zero almost everywhere other than the valid design point
around ϕ ∈[0, 0.25]. The observed behavior is consistent for many iterations of random sampling.
As seen in our Perf-HWGEN tests previously, λ ≠0 does not aid in the discovery of valid designs.
This may be explained by the gradient study shown in Figure 3.

7
Conclusion

In this paper, we demonstrate the need for an efﬁcient solution to address issues with differentiable
HW optimization (DSHWNAS) and MLP based HW generation (Exhaustive/Perf-HWGEN) on
sparsely valid spaces. Our method proposes to enables co-design on sparsely valid search spaces by
disentangling the training of a non-differentiable RL HW optimizer from NAS. The trained RL HW
optimizer is used along with a performance predictor to guide the differentiable NAS algorithm. Our
formulation is compatible wth other differentiable NAS strategies and is task agnostic (applicable to
general tasks in classiﬁcation, segmentation, detection, among others.). We can also adapt our RL
HW optimizer to more complex HW search spaces, as explored in ConfuciuX [43].

Sparsely valid spaces are common in HW accelerator design. Arbitrary constraints on architectural
parameters can arise due to resource limitations on accelerators that support different PE (Processing
Element) connectivity and compiler mapping strategies. Reducing the sparsity of valid design choices
incurs a cost in hardware design/veriﬁcation effort, physical design effort, fabrication cost, and energy
efﬁciency. More importantly, it increases development time and delays deployment. We hope that the
presented technique can help push accelerated deep learning into deployment faster. In future work,
we hope to introduce multi-task optimization as well as develop more sample-efﬁcient NAS methods
to enable co-exploration of more complex HW search spaces.

8
Broader Impact

Our work introduces a co-design method to discover efﬁcient and realizable neural network and
hardware design pairs on a broader class of hardware accelerators. Our proposed technique integrates
a single-stage NAS process with an RL agent for hardware optimization. This method allows for co-
design with marginally more resource requirements. For instance, training a sub-sampled architecture
from our NN search space would require 160 GPU hours using the SPOSRetrain240 strategy described
in the appendix. Our algorithm, RHNAS, discovers efﬁcient NN-HW designs in only 187 GPU hours.
Considering the large energy, compute, and carbon costs of previous non-differentiable NN-HW
co-design works, we hope that our work will help drive more efﬁcient NN-HW architecture search
research. Our algorithm is task agnostic and can be adapted to heterogeneous workload optimization
by introducing multi-workload simulation losses as a regularizer. The proposed method is particularly
useful for discovering optimized conﬁgurations for ASICs before deployment. We believe that our
work will encourage early co-design of accelerators in the development stages, allowing developers
to make wiser decisions about the capabilities, data-ﬂow styles, and hardware resource assignments
their accelerators should have. Our modest compute requirements should allow for the deployment of
accelerators in various stages of development as well as frequent prototyping of the design space.

References

[1] Liu, H., K. Simonyan, Y. Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search, 2019.

[2] Hu, S., S. Xie, H. Zheng, et al. Dsnas: Direct neural architecture search without parameter
retraining. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 12081–12089, 2020.

[3] Cai, H., L. Zhu, S. Han. Proxylessnas: Direct neural architecture search on target task and
hardware, 2019.

[4] Kao, S., T. Krishna. Gamma: Automating the hw mapping of dnn models on accelerators via
genetic algorithm. 2020 IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design
(ICCAD), pages 1–9, 2020.

[5] Kao, S., G. Jeong, T. Krishna. Confuciux: Autonomous hardware resource assignment for
dnn accelerators using reinforcement learning. 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 622–636, 2020.

[6] Lin, Y., D. Hafdi. Neural-hardware architecture search. 2019.

[7] Abdelfattah, M., L. Dudziak, T. Chau, et al. Best of both worlds: Automl codesign of a cnn and
its hardware accelerator. 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), pages
1–6, 2020.

[8] Jiang, W., X. Zhang, E. H. M. Sha, et al. Accuracy vs. efﬁciency: Achieving both through
fpga-implementation aware neural architecture search, 2019.

[9] Yang, L., Z. Yan, M. Li, et al. Co-exploration of neural architectures and heterogeneous asic
accelerator designs targeting multiple tasks, 2020.

[10] Zhang, Y., Y. Fu, W. Jiang, et al. Dna: Differentiable network-accelerator co-search. ArXiv,
abs/2010.14778, 2020.

[11] Choi, K., D.-K. Hong, H. Yoon, et al. Dance: Differentiable accelerator/network co-exploration.
ArXiv, abs/2009.06237, 2020.

[12] Dhar, P. The carbon impact of artiﬁcial intelligence. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(8):423–425,
2020.

[13] Schulman, J., F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, et al. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017.

[14] Mnih, V., A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, et al. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning,
2016.

[15] Mnih, V., K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, et al. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,
2013.

[16] Howard, A., M. Sandler, G. Chu, et al. Searching for mobilenetv3, 2019.

[17] Tan, M., B. Chen, R. Pang, et al. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile,
2019.

[18] Tan, M., Q. V. Le. Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,
2020.

[19] Liu, H., K. Simonyan, Y. Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. ArXiv, abs/1806.09055,
2019.

[20] Wu, B., X. Dai, P. Zhang, et al. Fbnet: Hardware-aware efﬁcient convnet design via differentiable
neural architecture search. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 10726–10734, 2019.

[21] Xie, S., H. Zheng, C. Liu, et al. Snas: Stochastic neural architecture search, 2020.

[22] Xu, Y., L. Xie, X. Zhang, et al. Latency-aware differentiable neural architecture search. ArXiv,
abs/2001.06392, 2020.

[23] Zhang, L., Y. Yang, Y. Jiang, et al. Fast hardware-aware neural architecture search. 2020
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW),
pages 2959–2967, 2020.

[24] Han, S., X. Liu, H. Mao, et al. Eie: Efﬁcient inference engine on compressed deep neural
network, 2016.

[25] Umuroglu, Y., N. J. Fraser, G. Gambardella, et al. Finn. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA
International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, 2017.

[26] Umuroglu, Y., Y. Akhauri, N. J. Fraser, et al. Logicnets: Co-designed neural networks and
circuits for extreme-throughput applications, 2020.
[27] Chen, Y.-H., T.-J. Yang, J. Emer, et al. Eyeriss v2: A ﬂexible accelerator for emerging deep
neural networks on mobile devices, 2019.
[28] Gao, M., J. Pu, X. Yang, et al. Tetris: Scalable and efﬁcient neural network acceleration with 3d
memory. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, 45(1):751–764, 2017.
[29] Chen, T., Z. Du, N. Sun, et al. Diannao: A small-footprint high-throughput accelerator for
ubiquitous machine-learning. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, 42(1):269–284, 2014.
[30] Chen, Y.-H., T.-J. Yang, J. S. Emer, et al. Eyeriss v2: A ﬂexible accelerator for emerging deep
neural networks on mobile devices. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits
and Systems, 9:292–308, 2019.
[31] Chatarasi, P., H. Kwon, N. Raina, et al. Marvel: A data-centric compiler for dnn operators on
spatial accelerators, 2020.
[32] Lu, Q., W. Jiang, X. Xu, et al. On neural architecture search for resource-constrained hardware
platforms. ArXiv, abs/1911.00105, 2019.
[33] Moreau, T., T. Chen, L. Vega, et al. A hardware-software blueprint for ﬂexible deep learning
specialization, 2019.
[34] Chen, T., T. Moreau, Z. Jiang, et al. Tvm: An automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for
deep learning, 2018.
[35] Bachrach, J., H. Vo, B. Richards, et al. Chisel: constructing hardware in a scala embedded
language. In DAC Design Automation Conference 2012, pages 1212–1221. IEEE, 2012.
[36] Chen, T., L. Zheng, E. Yan, et al. Learning to optimize tensor programs. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 31:3389–3400, 2018.
[37] Pedregosa, F., G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[38] Kendall, M. G. A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika, 30(1/2):81–93, 1938.
[39] Rafﬁn, A., A. Hill, M. Ernestus, et al. Stable baselines3.
stable-baselines3, 2019.
[40] Deng, J., W. Dong, R. Socher, et al. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
CVPR09. 2009.
[41] Krizhevsky, A. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
[42] Paszke,
A.,
S.
Gross,
S.
Chintala,
et
al.
torchvision.models

[43] Kao, S.-C., G. Jeong, T. Krishna. Confuciux: Autonomous hardware resource assignment for
dnn accelerators using reinforcement learning, 2020.
[44] Bergstra, J., D. Yamins, D. D. Cox. Making a science of model search: Hyperparameter
optimization in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. In Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 28,
ICML’13, page I–115–I–123. JMLR.org, 2013.
[45] Bergstra, J., R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, et al. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In
J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, K. Q. Weinberger, eds., Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 24, pages 2546–2554. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011.
[46] Akiba, T., S. Sano, T. Yanase, et al. Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization
framework, 2019.
[47] Bohr, M. 22fﬂtechnology.
uploads/sites/11/2017/04/2017_TMD_MarkBohr_22FFL.pdf.
[48] Pedram, A., S. Richardson, M. Horowitz, et al. Dark memory and accelerator-rich system
optimization in the dark silicon era. IEEE Design and Test, 34(2):39–50, 2017.
[49] Kingma, D. P., J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017.

A
Appendix

A.1
RL Agent Details

Agent details For the policy and value networks for PPO and A2C, and Q-network for the DQN, we
use MLPs with two hidden layers with sizes [64, 64].We ﬁxed the number of training episodes to
300000 and tuned the agents learning rate, discount factor (γ) and number of steps per update across
a wide range of settings.1

State representation details:

To represent the HW embeddings, we use a ﬂattened one-hot vector of size 36 for our HW accelerator
design as there are 7 HW features we control, with two features having 2 choices, two with 4 and
three with 8 (Listed in Table 1 in the paper).

As for the neural network state, we use a concatenated representation of the one-hot choices for each
layer. For ImageNet, we use a backbone with 20 blocks having 4 choices each - giving us a vector of
length 80. For CIFAR-10 we use a smaller network with 9 blocks - giving us a vector of length 36.

We utilize the same representations for the performance predictor - which we use in our reward
formulation. We found experimentally that normalizing the rewards lead to agents learning faster -
we used the VecNormalize wrapper from [39]

Hyperparameter optimization for Reinforcement Learning

In order to choose the right hyperparameters, we required signiﬁcant manual tuning and domain
knowledge. To automate our ﬂow and achieve further improvement, we set up hyper-parameter tuning
using Optuna [44, 45, 46]. Here, we focused on jointly optimizing the environment parameters ( P,
B, tmax) and a few algorithm speciﬁc parameters - (learning rate, discount factor γ, number of steps
per update) for all three algorithms and the number of environment steps per update for PPO and
A2C. We utilized a Tree Parzen estimator based sampler from Optuna [44, 45, 46] and optimized
each algorithm using 40 trials. We optimize agents based on how close they came to the optimal
solutions on ﬁxed test set of neural network architecture samples.

Hyper-parameter optimization signiﬁcantly reduced wall time (≈3x less) required to tune algorithms
and enabled discovery of trained agents that achieved within 0.2 % of the optimal cycle count and 2
% of the optimal EDP values on average.

We utilized the hyper-parameters discovered for the ImageNet RL task, and used the same settings
for training our CIFAR-10 RL optimizer. We found that we were able to achieve optimality rate of
99.2% (latency) on NNs sampled for the CIFAR-10 task.

A.2
Optimality

In order to benchmark our RL algorithms, we compare the performance of hardware designs found by
our RL solution to the optimal hardware design found through grid search using a metric Optimality
(O).

We measure Optimality by computing the ratio of the HW performance (Latency/EDP) of the best
performing hardware on a neural network and the performance of the design suggested by the RL
HW optimizer on a test set of NN architectures (T). Formally, with Hv denoting the set of all
synthesisable HW designs

minh∈Hv PerfPredictor(Zα, h)
PerfPredictor(σ(α), HWOpt(Zα, H0))

O = 100

∥T∥∑

Zα∈T

Note that we only use grid search on the HW space for evaluation and for HPO (on a small subset
of the NN space) Thus, our approach achieves near optimal performance without incurring the
signiﬁcant cost of grid search over the whole NN space.

1We run all our tests in this paper on an NVIDIA DGX-2™server with 4 NVIDIA V-100 32GB GPUs.

A.3
Latency and EDP calculations on VTA

We target the Intel 22FFL process [47] with a 1 GHz frequency for our ASIC designs. Cycle accurate
RTL simulation is used to calculate latency. For energy calculation, we assume that off-chip memory
transfers take 320 pJ/Byte [48]. For ASIC power analysis, we ran a large VTA design synthesis for 2
million cycles at 1 GHz on our ASIC. This required 0.52W on the VTA core and 5W of power for
DRAM memory transactions. Given that over 90% of the overall power is used for DRAM access,
we can leverage the data transfer count from RTL simulation (for a given neural network workload
running on a particular VTA instance) and approximate energy as the product of bytes transferred
and 320 pJ.

A.4
Predictor Network Training

We use L1 Loss for training the networks for 80 epochs with the Adam optimizer [49] with a learning
rate of 0.001 and a step decay by a factor of 0.1 at epochs 40 and 60.

A.5
Kendall Tau Metric

The Kendall Tau metric ranges from -1 to 1. If τ = 1, the ranking is fully preserved, if τ = −1, the
ranking is reversed. We measure the Kendall Tau metric by comparing the true ranking of the cycle
count (as an example metric) from the test data-set for a given set of NN - HW accelerator pairs, and
the ranking produced by the cycle count predictor network for the same set of NN - HW accelerator
pairs.

A.6
ImageNet search space

Supernet architecture

Table 11: Supernet architecture. CB - choice block. GAP - global average pooling. FC - fully
connected layer. Each line describes a sequence of 1 or more identical layers, repeated Repeat times.
All layers in the same sequence have the same number of output channels. The ﬁrst layer of each
sequence has a stride Stride and all others use stride 1.

Input
Block
Channels
Repeat
Stride

2242 × 3
3 × 3 Conv
16
1
2
1122 × 16
CB
64
4
2
562 × 64
CB
160
4
2
282 × 160
CB
320
8
2
142 × 320
CB
640
4
2
72 × 640
1 × 1 Conv
1024
1
1
72 × 1024
GAP
-
1
-
1024
FC
1000
1
-

A.7
CIFAR10 search space

Supernet architecture

Table 12: Supernet architecture. CB - choice block. GAP - global average pooling. FC - fully
connected layer. Each line describes a sequence of 1 or more identical layers, repeated Repeat times.
All layers in the same sequence have the same number of output channels. The ﬁrst layer of each
sequence has a stride Stride and all others use stride 1.

Input
Block
Channels
Repeat
Stride

322 × 3
3 × 3 Conv
64
1
1
322 × 64
CB
256
4
2
162 × 256
CB
640
4
2
82 × 640
CB
1280
1
2
42 × 1280
GAP
-
1
-
1280
FC
10
1
-

A.8
Structures of choice blocks for ImageNet and CIFAR-10

2

Channels Shuffle

Channels Split

5×5 DWconv

7×7 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

Channels Shuffle

Channels Shuffle

Channels Shuffle

(Stride=2)

(Stride=2)

(Stride=2)

(stride=2)

(Stride=2)

3×3 DWconv

5×5 DWconv

7×7 DWconv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

Channels Split

Channels Split

Channels Split

(Stride=2)

(Stride=2)

(Stride=2)

3×3 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

3×3 DWconv

5×5 DWconv

7×7 DWconv

Concat

Concat

Concat

3×3 DWconv

3×3 DWconv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

1×1 Conv

Concat

Concat

Concat

Concat

Concat

(a) Choice blocks with stride=1. Choice blocks
in search space.
From left to right: Choice_3,
Choice_5, Choice_7, Choice_x.

(b) Choice blocks with stride=2. Choice blocks
in search space.
From left to right: Choice_3,
Choice_5, Choice_7, Choice_x.

Figure 4: Choice blocks in our search space (Figure from [2])

A.9
CIFAR-10 experimental details

We ﬁrst do 80 epochs of NN architecture search. The NN architecture is then trained from scratch
using the SPOSretrain240 strategy. We found that this gave better accuracy for CIFAR-10. Thus, the
total number of epochs required for CIFAR-10 search and train is 320.
SPOSretrain240
Epochs: 240
Batch size: 1024
Input data has been augmented with random crops, random horizontal ﬂops.
Torch Transforms Normalize: transforms.Normalize((0.4914, 0.4822, 0.4465), (0.2023, 0.1994,
0.2010))
Categorical Cross Entropy
SGD: Momentum = 0.9, weight decay=0.00004
lr_mode : cosine
base_lr: 0.34
targetlr: 0.0
power: 1
warmup_mode: linear

2We follow the setting including choice blocks used in the released implementation of DSNAS[2]

warmup_lr: 0.0001
warmup_epochs: 5

A.10
ValidNet MLP

This MLP has two hidden layers with ReLU activation function and a SoftMax output to indicate
whether an input HW accelerator design is valid. The data-set is generated by randomly sampling
design choices and their output from our analytical validity checker. Since there are very sparsely
distributed valid HW design choices, we train the Validity MLP network with a cross entropy loss
and a weighted loss vector [0.05, 0.95] for valid and invalid designs respectively. The network is
trained for 150 epochs and samples 10240 design points. This validity checker MLP delivered an
accuracy of > 99%.

A.11
Performance Predictor Interpolation test.

We utilize the σ(α) NN categorical distribution in RHNAS. Thus we need to ensure that our
performance predictor is able to take in probability distribution of neural network architectural
choices and estimate the expected performance.

To do this, we conduct a test where we compute the ratio between the performance predictor output
for a continuous NN categorical distribution to the expected value for this output (Equation 4). We
obtain this expected value by summing over the predicted metric from discrete architectures sampled
from the categorical distribution obtained from σ(α) multiplied by their likelihood of being sampled.
We found that the ratio is 0.9910 with a variance of 0.0012 after sampling over 400 NN distributions.
This indicates that the performance predictor is able to accurately interpolate performance between
NN architectural choices.

PerfPredictor(σ(α), H0)
E
Zα∼σ(α)(PerfPredictor(Zα, H0))
(4)