Dylan Klein and Akansel Cosgun
Monash University, Australia

using pure self-exploration with those of the demonstrations.
The additional experience replay buffer was populated by use
of a sampling probability p which dictated the likelihood of the
next experience being sampled from the demonstrations buffer.
Thus this experience replay buffer held experiences which
were derived from mixed types of training, both pure self-
exploration and demonstrations. Increasing or decreasing the
value of p therefore controlled the relative proportion of pure
self-exploration experiences to demonstrations in the mixed
experience replay buffer.
III. EXPERIMENTS
An actor was placed in a 2-dimensional environment which
included 9 path-blocking obstacles, as seen in Figure 1. The
agent was rewarded by minimizing its Euclidean distance to
the goal. State information was encoded as a 22-dimensional
vector which included the x and y components of the actor’s
velocity, the actor’s relative position to its goal and the actor’s
relative position to each of the 9 obstacles. The action space
was encoded as a 5-dimensional vector containing quantities
between 0 and 1, which indicated the actor’s incremental po-
sitional change. For pure self-exploration, the quantities were
continuous values. Whereas for demonstrations, the quantities
were discrete binary and inputted via the keyboard. At each
time step the agent receives a reward equal to minus distance
to the goal.

Abstract—We investigate the effect of using human demonstra-
tion data in the replay buffer for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
We use a policy gradient method with a modiﬁed experience
replay buffer where a human demonstration experience is sam-
pled with a given probability. We analyze different ratios of
using demonstration data in a task where an agent attempts
to reach a goal while avoiding obstacles. Our results suggest
that while the agents trained by pure self-exploration and pure
demonstration had similar success rates, the pure demonstration
model converged faster to solutions with less number of steps.

arXiv:2107.06840v1 [cs.AI] 14 Jul 2021

I. INTRODUCTION

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is a promising method
for sequential decision making and is used in different plat-
forms including robotic manipulators [1], drones [2] and
mobile robots [3]. Despite its promise, DRL struggles for large
state spaces and sparse rewards.
Exploration for reinforcement learning is often driven by
stochastic processes, however there has been recent efforts
to use human demonstrations for overcoming exploration
problems [4], [5]. [6] proposes an actor critic method that
initializes the policy network from demonstrations and reﬁnes
it with self-exploration. [7] showed that a DQN trained on a
combination of demonstration and self-exploration performed
better than pure self-exploration in Atari games.
Replaying past experiences in machine learning was ﬁrst
explored by [8]. In deep reinforcement learning, an experience
replay buffers is commonly used to store past experiences [9],
[10], and often implemented as First-in-First-Out (FIFO)
buffers where experiences are sampled randomly.
In this work we compare the performance achieved by
selecting experiences from human demonstration data and self-
exploration. We base our work on modifying the experience
replay buffer of a variant of the Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (DDPG) algorithm [11]. We store the data from self-
exploration and demonstrations separately in the experience
replay buffer, which allows us to adjust the proportion of the
sampled experiences. We compare the performances of using
pure exploration, pure demonstration and a mixture of the two.
A simulated navigation problem is used for evaluation where
the agent’s goal is to reach a goal while avoiding obstacles.

Fig. 1: A snapshot of the 2-dimensional environment including the actor (in
gold), obstacles (in black) and goal (in red).

When pure self-exploration experiences were captured, the
actor was a RL agent with the following function:

II. MIXED EXPERIENCE REPLAY

We ﬁrst train a pure self-exploration policy and capture
100,000 experiences. Separately, human demonstrations were
performed in order to capture an additional 100,000 ex-
periences. Each set of 100,000 experiences were saved in
separate buffers. An additional experience replay buffer was
then created by combining the experiences that were captured

• Input: A pure self-exploration experience replay buffer,
containing state, action, reward, next step’s state and
episode termination information.

• Output: An updated pure self-exploration experience re-
play buffer, containing state, action, reward, next step’s
state and episode termination information.

Fig. 2: Success rate - percentage success rate for the agent to reach its goal
during evaluation.

Fig. 3: Solution efﬁciency - mean number of steps for the agent to reach its
goal during evaluation.

demonstrations. Again, models trained from 50% demon-
strations under-performed all other models from a solution
efﬁciency perspective.
V. CONCLUSION

When demonstrations were performed, the human was the
actor with the following function:

• Input: A visual display of the game screen.

• Output: A pure human-demonstration experience replay
buffer, containing state, action, reward, next step’s state
and episode termination information.

In this work we study the effect of using human demonstra-
tion data in the experience replay buffer. We compare three
experience sampling strategies: pure self-exploration, pure
demonstration and 50% demonstration. In a simulated path
ﬁnding scenario, we compared the approaches by according
to two task metrics: the rate which the agent reaches the goal,
and the number of steps taken when it does. The agents trained
by pure self-exploration and pure demonstration had similar
success rates at steady state. Pure demonstration strategy
converged faster than the other strategies and it resulted in
shorter paths to the goal. The 50% demonstration strategy
performed the worst of the three in both metrics.
A limitation of this study was that pure self-exploration im-
plemented a continuous action space whereas human demon-
strations implemented a discrete action space. This may ex-
plain poor performance of the policy at heavily mixed levels
of training types, for example at 50% demonstration.

IV. RESULTS

A neural network was trained with the mixed experience
replay buffer as its input. 10 models of the neural network
were saved every 100 episodes (1000 episodes in total) as
outputs. Each model was independently evaluated against 2
task performance metrics:

• Success rate: how often the agent reached its goal, as a
percentage.

• Solution efﬁciency: the mean number of steps the agent
took to reach its goal (for successful runs).
Figure 2 indicates that a model which was trained from
experiences that were controlled 100% by demonstrations
converges faster than pure self-exploration and mixed training
models. This suggests that demonstration-based training is
effective in narrowing down the space of possible solutions.
It is worth noting that 0% demonstration models and 100%
demonstration models reached to similar steady state values.
The success rates were slightly above 60% for both methods.
A low success rate was achieved because sometimes there was
no path to the goal due to random placement of obstacles.
The model trained by 50% by demonstrations and 50% by
self-exploration has a far more volatile learning curve than that
of pure self-exploration and pure demonstrations. This may
suggest that mixed training tends to confuse an agent due to
conﬂicting prescribed actions given a particular observed state.
Figure 3 shows that 100% demonstrations lend itself to
ﬁnding more efﬁcient solutions. In other words, less steps
were required for an agent to reach its goal when a human
previously provided examples of how to navigate efﬁciently.
This aligns with the fast convergence of Figure 2 where
demonstrations help in narrowing down the space of efﬁcient
solutions. Despite showing improvement over 1000 episodes,
models trained from 0% demonstrations did not appear to ﬁnd
solutions that were as efﬁcient as those trained from 100%

REFERENCES

[1] R. Lee et al., “Learning arbitrary-goal fabric folding with one hour of
real robot experience,” Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2020.
[2] C. de Souza et al., “Decentralized multi-agent pursuit using deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2021.
[3] B. Tidd et al., “Passing through narrow gaps with deep reinforcement
learning,” IROS, 2021.
[4] K. Subramanian, C. Isbell, and A. Thomaz, “Exploration from demon-
stration for interactive reinforcement learning,” in AAMAS, 2016.
[5] A. Nair et al., “Overcoming exploration in reinforcement learning with
demonstrations,” in ICRA, 2018.
[6] Y. Gao, J. Lin, F. Yu, S. Levine, T. Darrell et al., “Reinforcement learning
from imperfect demonstrations,” arXiv:1802.05313, 2018.
[7] T. Hester et al., “Deep q-learning from demonstrations,” in AAAI, 2018.
[8] L.-J. Lin, “Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learn-
ing, planning and teaching,” Machine Learning, 1992.
[9] D. Isele and A. Cosgun, “Selective experience replay for lifelong
learning,” in AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.
[10] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, p. 529, 2015.
[11] R. Lowe et al., “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-
competitive environments,” in NIPS, 2017.