Matteo Tiezzi, Gabriele Ciravegna and Marco Gori Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Graph Drawing techniques have been developed in
the last few years with the purpose of producing aesthetically
pleasing node-link layouts. Recently, the employment of differ-
entiable loss functions has paved the road to the massive usage
of Gradient Descent and related optimization algorithms. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework for the development of
Graph Neural Drawers (GND), machines that rely on neural
computation for constructing efﬁcient and complex maps. GNDs
are Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) whose learning process
can be driven by any provided loss function, such as the
ones commonly employed in Graph Drawing. Moreover, we
prove that this mechanism can be guided by loss functions
computed by means of Feedforward Neural Networks, on the
basis of supervision hints that express beauty properties, like
the minimization of crossing edges. In this context, we show
that GNNs can nicely be enriched by positional features to deal
also with unlabelled vertexes. We provide a proof-of-concept by
constructing a loss function for the edge-crossing and provide
quantitative and qualitative comparisons among different GNN
models working under the proposed framework.

arXiv:2109.10061v3 [cs.LG] 1 Jul 2022

Index Terms—Graph Drawing, Graph Representation Learn-
ing, Graph Neural Drawers, Graph Neural Networks

I. INTRODUCTION
V
ISUALIZING complex relations and interaction patterns
among entities is a crucial task, given the increasing
interest in structured data representations[1]. The Graph Draw-
ing [2] literature aims at developing algorithmic techniques to
construct drawings of graphs – i.e. mathematical structures
capable to efﬁciently represent the aforementioned relational
concepts with nodes and edges connecting them – for example
via the node-link paradigm [3], [4], [5]. The readability of
graph layouts can be evaluated following some aesthetic crite-
ria such as the number of crossing edges, minimum crossing
angles, community preservation, edge length variance, etc. [6].
The ﬁnal goal is to ﬁnd suitable coordinates for the node posi-
tions, and this often requires to explicitly express and combine
these criteria through complicated mathematical formulations
[7]. Moreover, effective approaches such as energy-based
models [8], [9] or spring-embedders [10], [11] require hands-
on expertise and trial and error processes to achieve certain

M. Tiezzi and M. Gori are with the Department of Information Engineering
and Mathematics, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy. M. Gori and G.
Ciravegna are with MAASAI, Inria, I3S, CNRS, Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, Nice,
France.
Matteo Tiezzi is the corresponding author

II. RELATED WORK

i<j
wij

||pi −pj|| −dij
2
(1)

STRESS(P) =
X

where pi, pj are the coordinates of vertices i and j, re-
spectively, dij is the graph theoretic distance (or shortest-
path) between node i and j, and wij is a weighting factor
leveraged to balance the inﬂuence of certain pairs given their
theoretical distance. Usually, it is deﬁned as wij = d−α
ij
with
α ∈[0, 1, 2]. The optimization of this function is generally
carried out leveraging complicated resolution methods (i.e.,
2D Newton-Raphson method, Stress Majorization, etc.) that
hinder its efﬁciency.
Recently, Gradient Descent methods were employed to
produce graph layouts [12] by minimizing the Stress function,
and noticeably, Ahmed et al. [6] proposed a similar approach
employing auto-differentiation tools. The advantage of this
solution is that, as long as aesthetic criteria are characterized
by smooth differentiable functions, it is possible to undergo
an iterative optimization process1 following, at each variable
update step, the gradient of the criteria.
Clearly, the deﬁnition of aesthetic criteria as smooth func-
tions could be hard to express. For instance, while we can
easily count the number of arc intersections, devising a smooth
function that may drive a continuous optimization of this
problem is not trivial [25], [6]. Indeed, ﬁnding the intersection
of two lines,2 is as simple as solving the following equation
system:
(

III. LOSS FUNCTIONS AND NEURAL AESTHETES

A.
Graph Drawing Algorithms

a1x + b1y + c1 = 0,
a2x + b2y + c2 = 0
(2)

By employing the classic Cramer’s rule we can see that there
is an intersection only in case of a non-negative determinant of
the coefﬁcient matrix A, Det(A) = a1b2 −a2b1 ̸= 0. Clearly,
the previous formula cannot be employed as a loss function in
an optimization problem since it does not provide gradients.
To tackle this issue and provide a scoring function optimizable
via gradient descent, we propose the Neural Aesthete.

B. The Neural Aesthete

A major contribution of this paper is that of introducing the
notion of Neural Aesthete, which is in fact a neural network
that learns beauty from examples with the perspective of
generalizing to unseen data. The obtained modelled function
that is expressed by the Neural Aesthete is smooth and
differentiable by deﬁnition and offers a fundamental heuristic
for graph drawing. As a proof-of-concept, we focus on edge
crossing. In this case, we deﬁne the Neural Aesthete as a
machine which processes two arcs as inputs and returns the
information on whether or not they intersect one each other.
Each arc is identiﬁed by the coordinates of the corresponding
pair of vertices, eu = (pi, pj) for eu ∈E. Hence, the

yeu,ev = ν

θ, eu, ev)
(3)

where θ ∈Rm is the vector which represents the weights
of the neural network. The Neural Aesthete is learned by
optimizing a cross-entropy loss function L(yeu,ev, ˆyeu,ev) over
the arcs (eu, ev) ∈E, which is deﬁned as:

L(yeu,ev, ˆyeu,ev) = −

ˆyeu,ev · log(yeu,ev)

+ (1 −ˆyeu,ev) · log(1 −yeu,ev)

,
(4)

where ˆyeu,ev is the target:

(
0,
if
(eu, ev) do not intersect
1,
otherwise
(5)

ˆyeu,ev =

and the intersection of eu, ev is automatically computed, e.g.,
by solving Eq. 2.

Fig. 1.
NEURAL AESTHETE FOR EDGE CROSSING. Left-to right, Graph
layouts with starting random node coordinates (START), optimized by mini-
mizing stress function with Gradient Descent (STRESS), optimized by Gradient
Descent applied on the Neural Aesthete for edge-crossing loss (NA-CROSS),
optimized by alternating stress loss and Neural Aesthete loss in subsequent
iterations (COMBINED). We report the graph layouts generated in three random
sparse graphs, one for each row.

Notice that the learning process from a ﬁnite set of su-
pervised examples yields weights that allows us to estimate
the probability of intersection of any two arcs. Basically, the
learned output of the neural network can be regarded as a
degree of intersection between any arc couple. Once learned,
this characteristic of the Neural Aesthete comes in handy for
the computation of the gradient of a loss function for Graph
Drawing. In general, we want to move the extreme nodes
deﬁning the two arcs towards the direction of non-intersection.
Hence, for the Graph Drawing task, the Neural Aesthete
is able to process an unseen edge couple (eu, ev) randomly
picked from the edge list E, and to predict their degree of
intersection yeu,ev. We deﬁne the loss function L(·, ·) on this
edge pair as the cross-entropy with respect to the target no-
intersection, ˆyeu//ev = 0

Moreover, this same approach can be conveniently com-
bined with other aesthetic criteria, for instance coming from
other Neural Aesthetes or from classical loss function (e.g.,
Stress). For example, we could consider

E = H(P) + λAA(·) + λBB(·)
(9)

where A(·) and B(·) denotes other aesthetic criteria charac-
terized by smooth differentiable functions.

C. Example: Neural Aesthete on small-sized Random Graphs
We provide a qualitative proof-of-concept example for the
aforementioned Neural Aesthete for edge-crossing in Figure 1.
We built an artiﬁcial dataset composed of 100K entries
to train the Neural Aesthete. Each entry of the dataset is
formed by an input-target couple (x, ˆy). The input pattern x
corresponds to the Neural Aesthete arcs input positions3 as
deﬁned in Section III, whose node coordinates are randomly
picked inside the interval [0, 1]. The corresponding target ˆy is
deﬁned as in Eq. 5.
We balanced the dataset composition in order to have a com-
parable number of samples between the two classes (cross/no-
cross). We trained a Neural Aesthete implemented as a Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) with two hidden layers of 100 nodes
each and ReLu activation functions, minimizing the cross-
entropy loss function with respect to the targets and leveraging
the Adam optimizer [56]. We tested the generalization capa-
bilities of the learned model on a test dataset composed of
50K entries, achieving a test accuracy of 97%4. Hence, the

Hu,v = L(yeu,ev, ˆyeu//ev) = −log(1 −yeu,ev)
(6)

This smooth and differential loss function foster the uti-
lization of Gradient Descent methods to optimize the problem
variables, i.e. the arc node coordinates (eu, ev).
This same procedure can be replicated to all the graph
edges,

H(P) =
X

(eu,ev)∈E
L(yeu,ev, ˆyeu//ev)
(7)

Overall, a possible graph drawing scheme is the one which
returns
P ⋆= arg min
P H(P).
(8)

This can be carried out by classic optimization methods. For
instance, a viable solution is by gradient descent as follows:

P ←P −η∇P H(P).

A. Graph Neural Networks

First and foremost, let us introduce some notation. We
denote with li all the input information (initial set of features)
eventually attached to each node i in a graph G. The same
holds for an arc connecting two nodes i and j, whose feature, if
available, is denoted with l(i,j). Each node i has an associated
hidden representation (or state) xi ∈Rs, which in recent
models is initialized with the initial features, xi = li (but
it is not necessarily the case in RecGNN models [36]). Many
GNN models can be efﬁciently described under the powerful
umbrella of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) [41],
where the node state xi is iteratively updated at each iteration
t, through an aggregation of the exchanged information among
neighboring nodes Ni, undergoing a message passing process.
Formally,

x(t−1)
(i,j)
=
MSG(t)
x(t−1)
i
, x(t−1)
j
, l(i,j)


(10)





x(t−1)
i
,
X

j∈Ni
x(t−1)
(i,j) , li

x(t)
i
=
AGG(t)


(11)

IV. GNNS FOR GRAPH DRAWING

where x(t)
(i,j) represent explicitly the message exchanged by
two nodes, computed by a learnable map MSGt(·).6 After-
wards, AGGt(·) aggregates the incoming messages from the
neighborhood, eventually processing also local node informa-
tion such as the node hidden state xi and its features li. The
messaging and aggregation functions MSG(t)(·), AGG(t)(·) are
typically implemented via Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs)
learned from data. Apart from RecGNN, other GNN models
leverage a different set of learnable parameters for each
iteration step. Hence, the propagation process of such models
can be described as the outcome of a multi-layer model, in
which, for example, the node hidden representation at layer t,
x(t)
i , is provided as input to the next layer, t + 1. Therefore
an ℓ-step message passing scheme can be seen as an ℓ-layered
model.

The increasing adoption of GNNs in several research ﬁelds
and practical tasks [59], [60] opens the road to an even
wider spectrum of problems. Clearly, Graph Drawing and
GNNs seem inherently linked, even if the formalization of
this learning process under the GNN framework is not trivial.
As pointed out in Section II, some recent works leveraged
GNNs-inspired models for Graph Drawing. DeepDrawing [15]
employs a graph-based LSTM model to learn node layout
styles from Graph Drawing frameworks. DeepGD [19] is a
concurrent work in which an MPNN processes starting node
positions to develop pleasing layouts that minimize combina-
tions of aesthetic losses (Stress loss combined with others).
Starting node positions, however, needs to be initialized by
standard graph drawing frameworks [14]; in case a random
initialization is employed, network performances deteriorate.

Recently, it has been shown that the usage of random nodal
features theoretically strengthens the representational capabil-
ity of GNNs [63], [64]. Indeed, setting random initial node
embedding (i.e., different random values when processing the
same input graph) enable GNNs to better distinguish local
substructures, to learn distributed randomized algorithms and
to solve matching problems with nearly optimal approximation
ratios. Formally, the node features can be considered as
random variables sampled from a probability distribution µ
with support D ⊆Rs,

Method: Funct.
Implementation

GCN[20]: Mean
σ

cvW (t)xv(t−1) + P
u∈Nv cu,vW (t)xu(t−1)


GAT[21]: Att.
σ
P
u∈Nv α(t−1)
u,v
W (t)x(t−1)
u


GIN[43]: Sum
MLP(t)
(1 + ϵ)xv(t−1) + P
u∈Nv xu(t−1)

This convenient framework is capable to describe several
GNN models [18]. In this work, we focus our analysis on
three commonly used GNN model from literature (i.e., GCN
[20], GAT [21], GIN [43]) whose implementation is given
in Table I, characterized by different kinds of aggregation
mechanisms (degree-norm, attention-based, injective/sum, re-
spectively). Following the Table notation, in GCN cu,v denotes
a normalization constant depending on node degrees; in GAT
α(t−1)
u,v
is a learned attention coefﬁcient which introduces
anisotropy in the neighbor aggregation, σ denotes a non-
linearity and W, W0, W1 are learnable weight matrices; in GIN
ϵ is a learnable parameter (which is usually set to zero).

li ∼µ,
∀i ∈V
(12)

where µ can be instantiated as the Uniform distribution.
The main intuition is that the underlying message passing
process combines such high-dimensional and discriminative
nodal features, fostering the detection of ﬁxed substructures
inside the graph [63]. These approaches, which hereinafter
we refer to as rGNNs, proved that classiﬁcation tasks can
be tackled in a novel way, with a paradigm shift from the
importance of task-relevant information (the features values) to
the relevance of the relationship among node values. However,
the peculiar regression task addressed in this work requires
both positional and structural knowledge, which is essential
to identify and distinguish neighboring nodes.

B. Problem Formulation

To address this issue, we keep standard GNN architectures
and leverage Positional features deﬁned as the Laplacian
eigenvectors [65] of the input graph, as introduced recently in
GNNs [52]. Laplacian eigenvectors embed the graphs into the
Euclidean space through a spectral technique, are unique and
distance-preserving (far away nodes on the graph have large
PE distance). Indeed, they can be considered hybrid positional-
structural encodings, as they both deﬁne a local coordinate
system and preserve the global graph structure.
Formally, they are deﬁned via the factorization of the graph
Laplacian matrix:

L = I −D−1/2AD−1/2 = U T ΛU,
(13)

where I is the N × N identity matrix, D is the node degree
matrix, A is the adjacency matrix and Λ and U correspond
respectively to the eigenvalues and eigenvectors. As pro-
posed in [52], we use the k smallest non-trivial eigenvectors
to generate a k-dimensional feature vector for each node,
where k is chosen by grid-search. Noticeably, given that the
smallest eigenvectors provide smooth encoding coordinates
of neighboring nodes, during the message exchange each
node receives and implicit feedback on its own positional-
structural characteristics from all the nodes with which it is
communicating. This process foster the regression task on
the node coordinates, which receives useful information from
their respective neighborhood. We believe that this is a crucial
component of the model pipeline.

Sparse
Rome

750

Sparse
Rome

1000

500

500

250

100
200
300
0

25
50
75
100
0

Fig. 2. Datasets composition statistics. On the left, the histogram of the graph
order (number of nodes for each graph |V|) for both the analyzed datasets.
On the right, the histogram of the graphs sizes (number of edges |E|). The
SPARSE dataset is characterized by a sparse connection pattern.

(i) distance with respect to ground truth node coordinates
belonging to certain layouts, produced by Graph Drawing
packages (Section IV-D);
(ii) aesthetic loss functions (e.g. Stress) (Section IV-E);
(iii) loss functions provided by Neural Aesthetes (Section
IV-F).
We assume to work with solely the graph topology, hence the
node are not characterized by additional features.
We employed two different graph drawing datasets with
different peculiarities. We chose to address small-size graphs
(≤100 nodes) to assure the graph layout readability, since
prior works highlighted node-link layouts are more suitable
to small-size graphs [15], [66]. The former one is the ROME
dataset7, a Graph Drawing benchmarking dataset containing
11534 undirected graphs with heterogeneous structures and
connection patterns. We preprocessed the dataset removing
three disconnected graphs8. Each graph contains a number of
nodes between 10 and 100. Some samples of the dataset are
reported in the ﬁrst column of Figures 3 and 4, drawn with
different layouts (see the following).
We built a second dataset, which we refer to as SPARSE,
with the same technique described in Section III-C. We gener-
ated 10K Erd˝os-R´enyi graphs following the method presented
in [57] for efﬁcient sparse random networks and implemented
in NetworkX [58]. We randomly picked the probability of
edge creation in the interval (0.01, 0.05) and the number of
nodes from 20 to 100. To improve the sparsity and readability,
we discarded all the created graphs having both more than
60 nodes and more than 120 edges. Afterwards, we selected
the connected component of the generated graph having the
biggest size (max node number). We report in Figure 2 a visual
description of the datasets composition.
In order to carry out the training process and afterwards
evaluate the obtained performances, we split each of the
datasets into three sets, (i.e. training, validation, test) with a
ratio of (75%, 10%, 15%).

framework provides several utilities to plot graph appearances.
We choose two different classical layouts. The ﬁrst is the
KAMADA-KAWAI node layout [9] computed by optimizing
the Stress function. In few words, this force-directed method
models the layout dynamic as springs between all pairs of
vertices, with an ideal length equal to their graph-theoretic
distance. The latter is the SPECTRAL layout, which leverages
the unnormalized Laplacian ˆL and its eigenvalues to build
cartesian coordinates for the nodes [67], formally:

ˆL = D −A = ˆU T ˆΛ ˆU,
(14)

where ˆΛ and ˆU correspond to the eigenvalues and eigenvec-
tors, respectively, and using the ﬁrst two non-trivial eigenvec-
tors (k = 2) as the actual node coordinates.9 We remark that
Eq. 13 and 14 produce different outputs. This layout tends to
highlight clusters of nodes in the graph.10

Each training graph is enriched by Positional Encodings
deﬁned as k-dimensional Laplacian Eigenvectors (see Sec-
tion IV-B) and is processed by each of the tested GNN
models to predict the node coordinates. Hence, we need a
loss function capable to discern if the generated layout is
similar to the corresponding ground truth. Furthermore, trained
models should generalize the notion of graph layout beyond a
simple one-to-one mapping. For these reasons, we leverage the
Procrustes Statistic [15] as a loss function since it measures the
shape difference among graph layouts independently of afﬁne
transformations such as translations, rotations and scaling.
Given a graph composed of N nodes, the predicted node
coordinates P = (p1, ..., pN) and the ground-truth positions
ˆP = (ˆp1, .., ˆpN), the Procrustes Statistic similarity is deﬁned
as the squared sum of the distances between P and ˆP after a
series of possible afﬁne transformations [15]. Formally:


Tr(P T ˆP ˆP T P)
1
2 2

R2 = 1 −

Tr(P T P)Tr( ˆP T ˆP)
(15)

D. GNNs learn to draw from ground-truth examples

where Tr(·) denotes the trace operator and the obtained
metric R2 assumes values in the interval [0, 1], the lower the
better. We will use the Procrustes Statistic-based similarity
both as the loss function to guide the model training, and to
evaluate its generalization capability on the test set.
We tested the proposed framework comparing the test
performances obtained by the three different GNN models

The ﬁrst experimental goal is focused on the task of learning
to draw graph layouts given ground-truths node positions
produced by Graph Drawing frameworks. Among several
packages, we chose NetworkX [58] for its completeness
and ease of integration with other development tools. This

The strength of the Laplacian PE is validated by the decent
performances yielded by the MLP baseline. Conversely, the
random features characterizing the rGNNs are not sufﬁcient
to solve this node regression task. Some additional struc-
tural information is required in order to jointly represent the
node position and its sorroundings. Indeed, all the models
exploiting the proposed solution outperform the competitors.
The improved performances with respect to MLP are due to
the fact that nodes states receive implicit feedback on their
own position during the message passing steps. The proposed
GAT model with Laplacian PE achieves the best performances
in all the settings. We believe that the attention mechanism
plays a crucial role in the task of distinguishing the right
propagation patterns, alongside the fact that the multi-head
attention mechanism provides a bigger number of learnable
parameters with respect to the competitors.
In general, the SPECTRAL layout is easier to be learned by
the models. This can be due to the fact that the Laplacian PE
represent an optimal feature for this task, given the common
spectral approach. Even from a qualitative perspective gener-
ated layouts are almost identical to the Ground Truth. Vice
versa, the KAMADA-KAWAI layout represents an harder task
to be learned from ground-truth positions, especially in the
case of the SPARSE dataset. As pointed out in [52], Laplacian-
based PE have still some limitations given by natural symme-
tries such as the arbitrary sign of eigenvectors, that several
recent works are trying to solve [49].

TABLE II
PROCRUSTES STATISTIC SIMILARITY (DEFINED IN EQ. 15) ON THE TEST
SPLIT OF THE ROME AND SPARSE DATASET. WE COMPARE THREE GND
MODELS WITH TWO GRAPH LAYOUTS GENERATION, KAMADA-KAWAI
AND SPECTRAL. WE REPORT THE AVERAGE VALUES AND STANDARD
DEVIATIONS OVER THREE RUNS WITH DIFFERENT WEIGHTS
INITIALIZATION.

E. GNNs learn to draw minimizing aesthetic loss functions

Model
ROME
SPARSE

KAMADA
SPECTRAL
KAMADA
SPECTRAL

MLP
0.291 ± 0.000
0.144 ± 0.000
0.282 ± 0.001
0.131 ± 0.000
rGCN
0.612 ± 0.009
0.527 ± 0.008
0.592 ± 0.006
0.532 ± 0.009
rGAT
0.475 ± 0.008
0.437 ± 0.008
0.465 ± 0.015
0.425 ± 0.017
rGIN
0.685 ± 0.001
0.590 ± 0.003
0.675 ± 0.010
0.603 ± 0.030

COMPET.

GCN
0.241 ± 0.001
0.078 ± 0.002
0.228 ± 0.000
0.060 ± 0.000
GAT
0.186 ± 0.000
0.057 ± 0.000
0.177 ± 0.001
0.045 ± 0.001
GIN
0.240 ± 0.002
0.076 ± 0.003
0.229 ± 0.003
0.059 ± 0.001

GND

In Figures 3 and 4, we report a qualitative evaluation ob-
tained by the best performing models for each different GNN
architecture on three randomly picked graphs from the test set
of each dataset. Figure 3 shows the aforementioned evaluation
in the case of the KAMADA-KAWAI layout supervision, both
for the ROME dataset (ﬁrst four columns, where the ﬁrst one
depicts the Ground Truth (GT)) and for the SPARSE dataset.
Figure 4 shows the same analysis in the case of the SPECTRAL
layouts. The results show the good performances of the GND
framework in generating two heterogeneous styles of graph
layouts, learning from different ground truth node coordinates.

GT
GCN
GAT
GIN
GT
GCN
GAT
GIN

Fig. 3. KAMADA-KAWAI layout. Qualitative example of the predicted node coordinates for both the ROME dataset (ﬁrst four column) and the SPARSE dataset
(subsequent four columns). Each row depicts the Ground-Truth positions (GT), the graph layout produced by GCN, GAT, GIN model, left-to-right. We report
the predictions on three different test graphs (rows).

ROME
SPARSE

GT
GCN
GAT
GIN
GT
GCN
GAT
GIN

Fig. 4. SPECTRAL LAYOUT. Predicted node coordinates for the ROME dataset (ﬁrst four column) and the SPARSE dataset (subsequent four columns). Each
row depicts the Ground-Truth positions (GT), the graph layout produced by GCN, GAT, GIN model, left-to-right. We report the predictions on three different
test graphs (rows).

to wij =
1
dij (hence, α = 1) and compute the averaged
Stress function12. For this experiment, we use the stress

TABLE III
AVERAGE STRESS LOSS VALUE OBTAINED ON THE TRAINING SET AND
TEST SET BY THE BEST SELECTED MODELS, FOR EACH DATASET. WE
REPORT THE MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OBTAINED OVER THREE
RUNS INITIALIZED WITH DIFFERENT FIXED SEEDS. WE DO NOT REPORT
STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR NEATO AND PIVOTMDS, BEING
DETERMINISTIC ALGORITHMS.

Model
ROME
SPARSE

TRAIN LOSS
TEST LOSS
TRAIN LOSS
TEST LOSS

ForceAtl.2 27.44 ± 0.01
26.82 ± 0.02
23.31 ± 0.01
22.69 ± 0.02
Neato
4.35
4.34
5.61
5.66
Piv.MDS
16.40
16.65
28.93
29.27

GD

MLP
1.07 ± 0.01
1.06 ± 0.03
1.16 ± 0.02
1.18 ± 0.00
rGCN
1.25 ± 0.01
1.24 ± 0.04
1.70 ±0.02
1.72 ±0.01
rGAT
0.98 ± 0.02
0.97 ± 0.00
1.34 ± 0.01
1.36 ± 0.01
rGIN
1.11 ± 0.03
1.49 ± 0.04
1.49 ±0.07
1.89 ± 0.02

COMPET.

GCN
0.51 ± 0.02
0.53 ± 0.03
0.56 ±0.05
0.61 ±0.02
GAT
0.33 ± 0.02
0.34 ± 0.00
0.30 ± 0.02
0.33 ± 0.01
GIN
0.49 ± 0.04
0.88 ± 0.05
0.28 ±0.05
0.81 ± 0.01

GND

ROME

GCN
GAT
GIN

Summing up, the experimental campaign showed the gen-
eralization capabilities of the proposed framework even in the
task of minimizing common aesthetic criteria imposed on the
GNNs node-wise predictions, such as the stress function, on
unseen graphs. The GND framework is capable to predict
node positions on unseen graphs respecting typical stress
minimization layouts, without providing at inference time any
explicit graph-theoretic/shortest-path information.

F. GNNs learn to Draw from Neural Aesthetes

Fig. 5. STRESS MINIMIZATION ON ROME. Qualitative example of the graph
layout produced by three GNN models on the test graphs of the ROME dataset.
Each row contains one of the same three graphs depicted in the ﬁrst column
of Figure 3 for comparison with the layout produced by Kamada-Kawai [9].

We report in Figure 5 and 6 some qualitative examples of
the graph layouts produced by the best selected GNN models
on test samples (the same graphs selected for Figure 3) of the

GCN
GAT
GIN

STRESS
NA-CROSSING
COMBINED

Fig. 7.
LEARNING FROM THE NEURAL AESTHETE. We report the layouts
obtained on three randomly picked test graphs from the Rome dataset, one for
each row. Left-to-right: Graph layout generated by optimizing the stress loss
function, the edge-crossing Neural Aesthete based loss (denoted with NA-
Crossing), the combination of the two losses with a weighing factor λ = 0.5.

Fig. 6. STRESS MINIMIZATION ON SPARSE. Same setting of Figure 5.

matrix, the Neural Aesthete (which was trained beforehand
as explained in Section III-C) processes couples of arcs and
output their degree-of-intersection. The overall loss function
can then be composed by the contribution given by each of
the considered arc-couples, as in Eq. 6.
We restrict our analysis to the Rome dataset, exploiting a
GAT model with 2 hidden layers, an hidden size of node state
of 25, PE dimension k = 10, learning rate η = 10−2. We
compare the graph layout generated by this model in three
randomly picked test graphs, comparing three different loss
function deﬁnitions: (i) stress loss, (ii) Neural-Aesthete edge-
crossing based loss H(P), (iii) a combination of the two losses
with a weighing factor λ = 0.5 acting on the Neural Aesthete
loss, in particular:

G. Computational Complexity

The proposed framework leverages the same computational
structure of the underlying GNN model, which we can gener-
ally describe, for each parameter update, as linear with respect
to the edge number O

T(|V|+|E|)

, where T is the number of
iterations/layers, |V| the number of nodes and |E| the number
of edges. Through our approach, there is not any increase in
the computation related to the graph topology or the edge
connection patterns. At inference time, the only additional
requirement is the computation of the Laplacian PEs, requiring
O(E3/2), with E being the number of edges, that however can
be improved with the Nystrom method [68], [52].

LOSS(P) = STRESS(P) + λH(P).
(16)

H. Scaling to bigger graphs

GND
sfdp
PivotMDS

45

45

Time (s)

Time (s)

30

30

dwt_162
|V| = 162
|E| = 672

15

15

0

0

600
1200
1800
2400
Nodes

3K
6K
9K
12K
Edges

dwt_307
|V| = 307
|E| = 1415

Fig. 8. Computational time comparison on dwt_n graphs. Left: correlation
between the number of nodes in the graph and the layout generation timings of
the analyzed Graph Drawing methods. Right: correlation between number of
edges available in the graphs and the corresponding layout generation timings.

dwt_503
|V| = 503
|E| = 3k

Matrix Collection.14 We report in Figure 8 the computational
times required by the different techniques to generate graph
layouts of different scale, from the dwt_n graph family. We
analyze both the correlation on graph order (left – varying
number of nodes) and size (right – varying number of edges).
We compare the GND execution times against those of the
NetworkX-GraphViz implementation of neato and sfdp,
the latter being a multilevel force-directed algorithm that efﬁ-
ciently layouts large graphs. We also tested the Fruchterman-
Reingold force-directed algorithm implemented in NetworkX
(denoted with FR) and the PivotMDS implementation from the
NetworKit C++ framework [69]. The tests where performed in
a Linux environment equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-
10900X CPU @ 3.70GHz, 128 GB of RAM and an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB). We report the average
execution times over three runs (we omit the variances due to
their negligible values). These results conﬁrm the advantages
of the proposed approach. While all the competitors require
expensive optimization process that increase their impact with
bigger graph scale, the fast inference step carried on by GNDs
assures small timings even with big graphs. Computing Lapla-
cian PE is scalable and does not hinder the time efﬁciency of
the proposed method. To asses the quality of the generated
layouts, we report in Figure 9 a comparison among the ones
yielded by GND the framework, sfdp and PivotMDS on
several graphs from the SuiteSparse collection (we report the
graph name, its order |V| and size |E|). While we remark that
in this experiment we exploited a GND model trained on a
smaller scale dataset (i.e., Rome), the performances show a
signiﬁcant ability of the model to generalize the learned laws
(e.g., the stress minimization in this case) to unseen graphs,
even when dealing with diverging characteristics. However, we
also remark that graphs having very diverse structures from the
training distribution may be not correctly plotted. The causes
of such performances drop are twofold. First, the intrinsic
dependance of neural models on the inductive biases learned
during the training process leads to an inability to generalize
to unseen graph topologies. On the other hand, the limitations
of Laplacian PE to discriminate certain graph simmetries or
structures [52] may be further compounded with larger scale
datasets, which is an active area of research [49].

dwt_992
|V| = 992
|E| = 9k

dwt_1005
|V| = 1k
|E| = 5k

rdist3a
|V| = 2k
|E| = 57k

Fig. 9.
Large scale graphs from the SuiteSparse Matrix collection. Left to
right: layouts produced by a GAT-based GND (trained to minimize stress on
the Rome dataset), layout produced by the sfdp algorithm for large scale
graphs and outcome of the PivotMDS method. We report for each row the
name of the graph from the dataset collection, its order (|V|) and size (|E|).

V. CONCLUSION

The authors would like to thank Giuseppe Di Battista for
the insightful discussions and for useful suggestions on the
Graph Drawing literature and methods. This work was partly
supported by EU Horizon 2020 project AI4Media, under
contract no. 951911 (

REFERENCES