Humans are not Boltzmann Distributions: Challenges and Opportunities
for Modelling Human Feedback and Interaction in Reinforcement Learning

David Lindner1 and Mennatallah El-Assady1

1 ETH Zurich


arXiv:2206.13316v1 [cs.LG] 27 Jun 2022

Abstract

Position Statement.
We argue that human-in-the-loop re-
inforcement learning needs more realistic human models.

Reinforcement learning (RL) commonly assumes
access to well-speciﬁed reward functions, which
many practical applications do not provide.
In-
stead, recently, more work has explored learning
what to do from interacting with humans. So far,
most of these approaches model humans as be-
ing (nosily) rational and, in particular, giving unbi-
ased feedback. We argue that these models are too
simplistic and that RL researchers need to develop
more realistic human models to design and evalu-
ate their algorithms. In particular, we argue that hu-
man models have to be personal, contextual, and
dynamic. This paper calls for research from differ-
ent disciplines to address key questions about how
humans provide feedback to AIs and how we can
build more robust human-in-the-loop RL systems.

Contributions.
We, propose a framework for modeling hu-
man feedback as personal, contextual, and dynamic. For each
category, we discuss open research questions both from a so-
cial science and a computer science perspective, and call for
interdisciplinary research to address these questions.

2
Related Work

Research on human-centered machine learning has borrowed
many methods from social science and the humanities to as-
sess human feedback and interaction. However, most of the
assumptions made about the reasoning processes, interac-
tion and communication dynamics, as well as the integration
of such feedback into learning models has remained unchal-
lenged, lacking effective human-centered evaluations [26].
In this section, we provide a brief overview of types of
human-AI interaction, with a speciﬁc focus on RL.

1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successful in solving
complex tasks, such as playing video games [20] or control-
ling robotic systems [9]. However, it remains challenging to
apply RL to tasks without a well-speciﬁed reward function,
such as autonomous driving [16]. RL from human feedback
is a promising alternative that aims to interactively learn from
human feedback instead of a ﬁxed reward function [3].
Unfortunately, existing approaches to learning from human
feedback rely on simple human models, such as Boltzmann
distributions [15]. We argue that currently used models are
too simplistic. We discuss challenges we expect such meth-
ods to encounter as they are being increasingly deployed in
practical applications and present opportunities for further re-
search towards improved modeling of human feedback.
In this paper, we, ﬁrst, a brief overview of commonly used
types of human-AI interaction and work in RL using human
feedback (Section 2). Then, we present a range of open re-
search questions about modeling human feedback (Section 3)
and key dimensions for designing RL systems that can ro-
bustly learn from humans (Section 4). We raise many re-
search questions about human modeling that are highly rele-
vant to any human-AI interaction. We close by discussing the
implications of our analysis and a call for interdisciplinary re-
search addressing these questions (Section 5).

2.1
Collaborative Human-AI Interaction

To give an overview of the most common types of human-AI
interaction, we provide a categorization in Figure 1. We dis-
tinguish three categories of interaction: Instruction, Evalua-
tion, and Cooperation. For a more thorough review of pos-
sible types of human-AI interaction in the context of RL, we
refer to recent reviews [15, 19].

Instruction.
Human feedback is instructive if it tells the
agent what to do.
For example, demonstrations show the
agent how to do a speciﬁc task. In some situations, the agent
can also indirectly obtain information about what to do sim-
ply by observing the state of the world [25]. More directly,
the human can tell the agent what to do by correcting it phys-
ically [1], or providing improvements, e.g., an alternative ac-
tion in a speciﬁc situation [13].

Evaluation.
Human feedback is evaluative if it tells the
agent how well it is doing. Humans can provide this infor-
mation directly, e.g., by comparing trajectories [3] or shut-
ting off the agent [10]. The agent can also get implicit evalu-
ations, e.g., by measuring user engagement [29], or by moni-
toring gestures or facial expressions [4].

2.2
Models of Human Feedback in RL

The most popular way to integrate human feedback in RL is
learning from demonstrations, where the agent learns a task
from observing a (human) expert’s demonstrations of a task.
This can happen either via imitation learning [12], or via in-
verse reinforcement learning [21]. The main limitation of
this approach is that the demonstrations have to be (close to)
optimal, which is often difﬁcult for humans to achieve. In-
stead of demonstrations, a human can also provide a direct
reinforcement signal, e.g., a binary rating “good” or “bad”
[17]. In many applications, it can be easier to provide con-
trastive feedback, e.g., by comparing two possible actions or
trajectories, rather than an absolute evaluation. This moti-
vates preference-based RL [28].
All of these methods require a model of how humans give
feedback. They commonly assume that humans are perfectly
rational or at least unbiased. One of the most common ways
to model noisy feedback is using a Boltzmann distribution
[15]. Some work tries to evaluate the effect of this misspeciﬁ-
cation [8]. Other work tries to learn biases in human feedback
from data, with mixed results [24]. Overall, current methods
in RL from human feedback are heavily affected if their as-
sumptions about the human model are not satisﬁed [18].
The B-Pref benchmark [18] models irrationalities that hu-
mans might exhibit when giving feedback, intending to move
towards more realistic human models. The benchmark con-
siders humans making systematic mistakes, skipping compar-
isons of very similar or very different trajectories, or giving
myopic feedback, i.e., weighting recently seen things higher
when making decisions. We consider this work a promising
step in the right direction. However, none of the simulations
in B-Pref is grounded in the existing literature on cognitive
biases, and the benchmark is not based on human data.
Some literature on recommender systems has explored the
use of more advanced human models, but these methods are
often tailored to the speciﬁc applications and have not made
it to more general applications of RL yet [14, 23].

Figure 1: We classify a subset of common types of human feedback
in RL along three dimensions. Humans can give direct feedback to
an RL agent performing a task. The agent can also obtain indirect
feedback by observing the human. Feedback can be provided syn-
chronously, i.e., in real-time, or asynchronously, i.e., before or after
the agent acts. Finally, feedback is instructive if it tells the agent
what to do explicitly; feedback is evaluative if it only tells the agent
how good it is doing.

Most of our discussion applies to any human-AI interac-
tion. However, to be concrete, we focus on RL agents receiv-
ing evaluative or instructive feedback. This setting inherits
most problems of modeling humans in general, but it allows
for more concrete research on practical applications.

3.1
Personalized Feedback & Interaction
We cannot hope to ﬁnd a universal model that describes how
humans interact with RL systems that we can use to design
these systems. Human-AI interaction is inherently personal,
and we need to model it as such.
How a human interacts with an RL agent will depend on
personality factors [22]. For example, it is likely that in many
tasks, the user’s conscientiousness will affect how they eval-
uate an agent.
A crucial ﬁrst step towards designing per-
sonalized interaction is to understand how personality affects
human-AI interactions.
In addition to different personalities, each person also has
prior knowledge they bring into an interaction. Whether the
user is a domain expert, an ML expert, or a novice, will af-
fect which situations they can judge and which types of feed-
back they can give reliably. For example, an expert might
be able to provide near-optimal demonstrations, whereas a
novice might not. Still, the novice might be able to evaluate
the task competently when giving the right user interface [5].
As a ﬁrst step towards building personalized human mod-
els, we propose to study the following research questions:

3
Challenges in Human Feedback Modelling

Most existing approaches to incorporating human feedback
into RL, assume humans act noisily but are unbiased. It is
common to assume that humans are goal-driven and act ra-
tionally consistent. This model is, of course, wrong, and hu-
mans are far from rational and unbiased.
We argue that in practice, human-AI interaction is per-
sonal, contextual, and dynamic. This section discusses these
three aspects, focusing on open research questions. The next
section will discuss potential implications for designing sys-
tems that interactively learn from humans.

RQ1: How do personality factors inﬂuence how
humans interact with AI systems?

RQ2: Are there measurable personality factors
with a clear impact on the human feedback and in-
teraction dynamic to allow for personalization?

RQ3: How can we quantify prior knowledge and
semantic understanding to model interaction dy-
namics?

RQ4: Which aspects of the sociotechnical context
affect human-AI interaction?

Figure 2: Schematic overview of RL with human feedback.
In
Section 3, we discuss the key components of the interaction. Sec-
tion 4 discusses key dimensions for robust interactive learning: Per-
sonalized Learning (Section 4.1), Contextualized Modeling (Sec-
tion 4.2), and Adaptive Querying (Section 4.3).

RQ5: How do cultural (and other) differences in-
ﬂuence the interaction?

RQ6: How do contextual factors inﬂuence individ-
ual personality factors, and can they be modeled
independently?

RQ10: How should we choose the type of human
feedback for an individual user?

3.3
Adaptive Feedback & Interaction
A major limitation of most human models used in the RL lit-
erature is that they are static, i.e., they do not change through-
out the interaction.
This is unrealistic; in practice, both
the user and the AI system will accumulate knowledge that
changes how they interact with each other [27]. Other factors,
such as the user’s energy and motivation levels, might change
over time and affect the interaction. Moreover, the context of
the interaction might change due to external factors.
RL systems have to adapt to these dynamic factors and
adapt how they interact with humans over time. To build ro-
bost adaptive systems, it is necessary to investigate:

RQ11: How much can an RL system trust the re-
sponses of an individual user?

RQ12: Which explanations can an RL system pro-
vide to an individual user to allow them to give bet-
ter feedback?

4.2
Contextualized Modeling
Similar to building personalized learning systems, we want to
ensure to make them aware of the sociotechnical context of
the interaction as well. Building on the questions discussed
in Section 3.2, we want to answer similar questions from an
RL perspective:

RQ7:
Which
factors
have
temporal
and
interaction-dependent variation?

RQ8: Can we measure and predict changes in
these factors during interaction sequences?

RQ13: In which context can an RL system rely on
users providing high-quality feedback?

RQ9:
How do personal and contextual factors
adapt to changes in the interaction?

RQ14: How can an RL system provide context-
appropriate explanations of it’s behavior?

RQ15: How can we ensure RL systems can learn
from human feedback reliably even in novel con-
texts?

4
Implications for RL Applications

Now, let us turn our focus towards designing RL systems that
learn from interacting with humans. Along our three dimen-
sions of modelling human feedback and interaction, we now
highlight how to design RL systems that are personalized,
contextualized and adaptive.

4.3
Adaptive Querying
We need to enable RL systems to adapt to changes in their in-
teraction with humans. This is particularly important for de-
signing human-in-the-loop systems that do not have a sepa-
rate phase of learning from humans, but continuously inter-
act with humans during their deployment. Such systems need
to have uncertainty estimates that are well-calibrated with re-
spect to how users and interaction patterns might change. We
propose several concrete research questions in this direction:

4.1
Personalized Learning
To build RL systems that can learn from different people, we
need to ensure that all parts of the interaction are personal-
ized. Building on a better understanding of the aspects dis-
cussed in Section 3.1, we could decide which system designs
are most appropriate for which users. This includes answer-
ing the following research questions:

RQ16: How can RL systems make situation-aware
queries to users?

We reviewed research on human feedback in RL from a
human-centered perspective. We argued that current human
models used in RL are too simple and that we need better hu-
man models if we want to design systems that can learn from
humans robustly in the real world. We argued that we need
personal, contextual, and dynamic models to design robust
RL systems that learn from humans. We hope to start an in-
terdisciplinary discussion around these topics with the goal of
building better human models and designing interaction pro-
tocols that can work outside of simulations.

RQ18: How much can systems learn about a user’s
interaction patterns online, and how many induc-
tive biases do we need to encode?

5
Discussion
After discussing the most important dimensions for designing
more human-centered RL systems, let us highlight the key
challenges and research opportunities.

5.1
Challenges
An Interdisciplinary Research Challenge.
Modeling hu-
man feedback is not only a technical problem.
The most
crucial open research questions need to be answered from
a human-centered perspective. However, no single research
discipline is currently offering insights on the right level of
granularity. On the one hand, research in Neuroscience aims
to provide a detailed understanding on the basis of human be-
havior. However, its insights are not (yet) actionable for our
purpose. On the other hand, behavioral and cognitive psy-
chology research asks many similar questions. However, its
focus is often too broad to yield actionable insights on how to
model human feedback in RL systems.
More Difﬁculty for RL.
The main reason for using sim-
ple human models in current work is that they make learn-
ing more tractable. If we can no longer get unbiased feed-
back about rewards, how can we hope to still learn a good RL
policy. Developing more realistic human models will likely
make RL more difﬁcult.

References
[1]
Andrea Bajcsy, Dylan P Losey, Marcia K O’Malley, and
Anca D Dragan. Learning robot objectives from physi-
cal human interaction. In Conference on Robot Learn-
ing, pages 217–226. PMLR, 2017.
[2]
Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Tom Grifﬁths,
Sanjit Seshia, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. On the
utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordi-
nation. Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 32, 2019.
[3]
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Mar-
tic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforce-
ment learning from human preferences. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2017.
[4]
Yuchen Cui, Qiping Zhang, Alessandro Allievi, Peter
Stone, Scott Niekum, and W Bradley Knox. The em-
pathic framework for task learning from implicit human
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13649, 2020.
[5]
John J Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson.
A review
of user interface design for interactive machine learn-
ing. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Sys-
tems (TiiS), 8(2):1–37, 2018.
[6]
Upol Ehsan, Samir Passi, Q Vera Liao, Larry Chan,
I Lee, Michael Muller, Mark O Riedl, et al. The who in
explainable ai: how ai background shapes perceptions
of ai explanations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13509,
2021.
[7]
Upol Ehsan and Mark O Riedl. Human-centered ex-
plainable ai:
towards a reﬂective sociotechnical ap-
proach.
In International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, pages 449–466. Springer, 2020.
[8]
Rachel
Freedman,
Rohin
Shah,
and
Anca
Dra-
gan. Choice set misspeciﬁcation in reward inference.
In IJCAI-PRICAI Workshop On Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Safety, 2020.
[9]
Tuomas Haarnoja, Sehoon Ha, Aurick Zhou, Jie Tan,
George Tucker, and Sergey Levine.
Learning to
walk via deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.11103, 2018.
[10] Dylan Hadﬁeld-Menell, Anca Dragan, Pieter Abbeel,
and Stuart Russell. The off-switch game. In Workshops
at the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, 2017.

5.2
Research Opportunities
An Interdisciplinary Approach.
To make progress in
modeling human feedback, we need to answer multi- and
interdisciplinary research questions. These will require re-
search from a wide range of disciplines to engage with these
questions, including, but not limited to, researchers from
Computer Science, (Cognitive) Psychology, Ethics, Philoso-
phy, Behavioral Science, Communication Sciences, Sociol-
ogy, and Neuroscience. To answer the research questions we
posed, we need to ﬁrst compare the current understanding
from different disciplines. Then, we can aim to operational-
ize the open questions within speciﬁc disciplines and design
experiments to answer them.
Towards More Robust RL.
Ultimately, we hope to gain
insights into measurable factors that affect human-AI interac-
tion, which can be used to build better human models. Such
models promise to make it easier to design new RL algo-
rithms that learn from humans and benchmark existing meth-
ods in more realistic simulations without running user studies
to evaluate small algorithmic changes.
An Opportunity for New Algorithms.
A human-centered
perspective on the RL learning problem creates challenges
for applying existing methods, that assume access to a re-
ward function. But, it provides an opportunity for developing
novel, human-centered learning algorithms that are designed
with the goal of learning from and with humans.