Prior-Guided One-shot Neural Architecture Search

Peijie Dong1, Xin Niu1, Lujun Li2, Linzhen Xie1, Wenbin Zou3, Tian Ye4, Zimian Wei1, Hengyue Pan1

1 School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Hunan, China
2 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3 Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photonics Technology, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China
4 School of Ocean Information Engineering, Jimei University, Xiamen, China

arXiv:2206.13329v1 [cs.CV] 27 Jun 2022

{dongpeijienudt, niuxin, weizimian16, hengyuepan} @nudt.edu.cn



Abstract

Neural architecture search methods seek optimal can-
didates with efﬁciency weight-sharing supernet training.
However, recent studies indicate poor ranking consis-
tency about the performance between stand-alone ar-
chitectures and shared-weight networks.
In this paper,
we present Prior-Guided One-shot NAS (PGONAS) to
strengthen the ranking correlation of supernets.
Specif-
ically, we ﬁrst explore the effect of activation functions
and propose a balanced sampling strategy based on the
Sandwich Rule to alleviate weight coupling in the super-
net.
Then, FLOPs and Zen-Score are adopted to guide
the training of supernet with ranking correlation loss.
Our PGONAS ranks the 3rd place in the supernet Track
of CVPR2022 Second lightweight NAS challenge.
The
code is available at
NAS-competition-Track1-3th-solution.

Fig. 1. Overview of the Prior-Guided One-shot NAS (PGONAS).
The Balanced Sandwich Rule means that the proposed balanced
sampling strategy is based on the Sandwich Rule [27]. During the
training phase, priors are employed to guide the supernet training
with rank loss.

1. Introduction

present a weight-sharing mechanism for efﬁcient NAS to
optimize computation. It deﬁnes the supernet in which all
models share a single copy of weights, rather than training
models from scratch. DARTS [17] and DARTS-like meth-
ods [3, 22, 23] are another popular type of weight-sharing
approach. They optimize the continuous architecture pa-
rameters and network weights during supernet training. In
contrast, One-shot NAS [9, 12, 28] is a new paradigm that
separates architecture search from supernet training. One-
shot NAS uses evolutionary algorithms to sample numerous
architectures in the training stage of supernet. Then, these
candidates are then evaluated by inheriting weights from the
well-trained supernet in search stage. And ﬁnally, we train
the best performers. It requires less memory and is more ef-
ﬁcient because only a portion of the candidates are activated
and optimized.

There are tremendous advances in deep learning, in-
cluding automated machine learning. Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) is a branch of automated machine learning
(AutoML) that has sparked increased interest due to its re-
markable progress in a variety of computer vision tasks
[5, 7, 14, 16, 18, 29].
By balancing performance and re-
source constraints, it aims to reduce the cost of human ef-
forts in manually designing network architectures and dis-
cover promising models automatically. Many early NAS
works are based on Reinforcement Learning and evolution-
ary algorithms. However, these techniques [25, 31] require
sampling and evaluating numerous network architectures
from the search space, which can take hundreds of days with
thousands of GPUs.
To alleviate this challenge, ENAS [21] is the ﬁrst to

Despite the fact that One-shot NAS signiﬁcantly im-
proves search efﬁciency, it is prone to poor performance es-
timation during the evaluation process. It typically searches
for a large and complex network space with billions of op-
tions to ﬁnd the best ones, in which the supernet parameters
are tightly coupled. When child models are sampled and
trained in different iterations, they interfere with each other,
and their accuracy in the supernet is unavoidably averaged,
blurring the lines between strong and weak architectures.
As a result, a well-trained supernet ﬁnds it difﬁcult to ob-
tain a stable and accurate performance ranking of candidate
models.
In this paper, we propose Prior-Guided One-shot NAS
(PGONAS), an effective strategy to address the weak corre-
lation problem of weight-sharing supernet. The PGONAS
improvement for One-shot NAS can be highlighted in three
aspects: architecture enhancement, sampling strategies, and
prior-based regularization. First, we utilize PReLU to re-
place the second activation of the block to effectively en-
hance the predictability of the supernet in the channel di-
mension. Then, unlike the naive sampling strategy, we use
the Sandwich Rule (maximum, middle, and minimum) sam-
pling strategy and in place distillation. These two strate-
gies achieve 81.56 absolute correlation coefﬁcient, while
the baseline is 72.49. Encouraged by the recent train-free
NAS, we also evaluate some train-free metrics and are sur-
prised with its relatively advanced consistency (78.43 for
FLOPs and 81.29 for Zen-Score). Therefore, we introduce
these train-free metrics to guide the training of the super-
net as a priori. Speciﬁcally, we add a consistent regulariza-
tion loss for arbitrary pairs of candidates about its train-free
metrics and the training losses on the supernet. To further
improve, we carefully tune the weights of the loss and archi-
tectural distances. Finally, with the above advanced super-
net training techniques, we obtain the consistency of 83.20
and ranked 3rd in the supernet track of the CVPR 2022 NAS
Challenge.

initially train an over-parameterized supernet utilizing dif-
ferent sample strategies. After that, search a discrete search
space with numerous candidates. Sampling strategies are
important in the training stage because they affect how to
train an accurate and stable super-network for performance
estimation. [1], for example, trains the over-parameterized
network while dropping out operators with increasing prob-
ability, allowing their weights to co-adapt. SPOS [12] pro-
poses the uniform sampling method for supernet training
based on this.
Only one path is activated for each op-
timization step, and regular gradient-based optimizers are
used to optimize it. FairNAS [6] strengthens the One-shot
method by adhering to strict fairness for both super-network
sampling and training. AutoSlim [26] improves correlation
by optimizing the maximum & minimum and intermediate
paths by in-place distillation. OFA proposes a one-stage
supernet training strategy through progressive shrinkage.
As an alternative technology paradigm, the gradient-based
methodologies [17,22] initiate architecture parameters with
each operator, including using back-propagation to jointly
optimize them and network weights. Finally, magnitudes of
architecture parameters are used to select the best model. In
contrast, we propose a new One-shot NAS method based on
Autoslim [26] & priori-guided regularization, which is not
present in previous work.

Training-free Metric. In recent years, many researchers
began to realize that some training-free metrics can be used
to measure the capacity of neural networks. These methods
are generally based on Gaussian initialization of the model
and the ability to characterize random features. Speciﬁcally,
TE-NAS estimates expressiveness by directly computing
the number of active regions RN in randomly sampled im-
ages. The number of active regions is calculated directly
on the images. NASWOT calculates the architecture score
based on the kernel matrix of binary activation patterns be-
tween small batches of samples. Zen-score takes into ac-
count not only the distribution of linear regions, but also
the complexity, resulting in a more accurate estimate of the
expressiveness of the network. In addition, the number of
parameters and the computational volume of the model are
also indicators that can initially represent the capacity of the
model. In many scenarios, the larger model performs better.
In this work, we select FLOPs and Zen-score to guide the
training of the supernet using ranking losses.

2. Related Work

In this section, we brieﬂy summarize the investigative
techniques behind our approach, including One-shot NAS
and prior metrics.
One-shot NAS. In a wide variety of computer vision tasks
[10, 13, 30], manually designed neural networks had great
success.
Artiﬁcial architectures, on the other hand, are
commonly believed to be sub-optimal.
Both academia
and industry have recently become more interested in neu-
ral architecture search (NAS). The early NAS work trains
the child networks individually by RNN and reinforcement
learning, but consumes a large computer resource. Recent
One-shot NAS utilize weight-sharing super-network for ef-
ﬁcient NAS to reduce computation costs. Different child
models in these algorithms share the same weights. They

3. Prior-guided One-shot NAS

In this section, we present our architecture enhance-
ment & sampling strategies for weight-sharing supernet,
and ranking regularization based on a priori metrics, respec-
tively.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the location of activations in residual blocks.

3.1. Weight-sharing supernet Enhancement

Fig. 3. Illustration of the Sandwich Rule with Balanced Sampler.

Weight sharing in the supernet can lead to gradient con-
ﬂicts, making the supernet difﬁcult to converge and affect-
ing the ranking consistency of the supernet. Therefore, in
this paper, we explore the effects of activation functions,
sampling strategies, and regularization on the ranking con-
sistency of the supernet.
Activation Functions. Inspired by [24], we explore the ef-
fects of activation functions in detailed, including the lo-
cation and type of activation functions. ReLU is a non-
linear activation function that allows complex patterns in
the data to be learned. However, ReLU cannot learn ex-
amples for which their activation is zero. If the input is
less than 0, then it outputs zero, and the neural network
cannot continue the back propagation algorithm, which is
known as the dying ReLU problem. We observe that re-
placing ReLU with smoother activation functions helps al-
leviate the ranking disorder problem. Take Mish for ex-
ample, it provides a strong regularization effect and helps
make gradients smoother, which makes it easier to optimize
function contour. On the other hand, smoother activation
functions have wider minima, which improve generaliza-
tion compared to ReLU. In addition, the location of the ac-
tivation functions also matters. As shown in Figure 2, there
are two activation functions in the residual block. Deﬁne the
activation function between the two weight layer as internal
activation, and the activation function after shortcut as ex-
ternal activation. We found that internal activation plays an
important role in supernet training. If we replace the in-
ternal ReLU activation with smoother activation functions
such as PReLU, the supernet would suffer from gradient
explosion and is difﬁcult to converge. Also, the supernet is
not sensitive to converting the external activation functions.
Sampling Strategies. Two-stage NAS requires sampling
from the search space during training.
Thus, sampling

strategies would directly impact supernet optimization. A
suitable sampling strategy can alleviate the interference be-
tween sub-networks in the supernet. There are many sam-
pling strategies in One-shot NAS, such as the uniform sam-
pling strategy in SPOS [12], the progressive shrinking strat-
egy in Once for all [2], and the Sandwich Rule in Au-
toslim [26] and BigNAS [27].
Among them, we found
that the Sandwich Rule achieves a better rank correlation
in our search space. we proposed a noval sampling strategy
based on the Sandwich Rule. Speciﬁcally, we replace the
original random sampler with a balanced sampler, which is
motivated by BNAO [19]. Training of architectures of dif-
ferent sizes is imbalanced, which causes the evaluated per-
formances of the architecture to be less predictable of their
stand-alone accuracy. BNAO proposed sampling based on
the model size of sub-networks. As shown in Figure 3, there
are three samplers in PGONAS:

1. Maximum Sampler: sample the subnet with the largest
width and the largest depth.

2. Minimum Sampler: sample the subnet with the small-
est width and smallest depth.

3. Balanced Sampler: sample N subnets with random
width and random depth and sample one of them based
on pi =
F LOP si
P

j F LOP sj .

In-place distillation is also adopted in PGONAS. The
largest model is training with true label, the smallest model
and the middle size model are trained with in-place distilla-
tion.

3.2. Prior-guided Ranking Regularization

Algorithm 1 Training supernet S with pairwise rank loss.

1: Require: Deﬁne depth range and width range.
2: Require: Deﬁne n as number of sampled subnets in
each iteration, m as number of sampling pairs in com-
puting rank loss, k as prior in guiding rank loss.
initialize supernet parameters θs
with pretrained
weights.
3: while step t < T do
4:
Get next mini-batch of data x and label y.

Zero-shot Prior We adopt FLOPs and Zen-Score as prior,
respectively, to guide the training procedure.
With the
efﬁcient zero-shot NAS [4, 15, 20], the search cost has
been greatly reduced. Among them, we ﬁnally choose the
Zen-Score [15] as prior because of its stable and scale-
insensitive estimation ability. Zen-Score is a zero-shot pre-
dictor for ranking architectures, which can stably correlate
with the model accuracy without training the network pa-
rameters. Zen-Score can measure network expressivity by
averaging the Gaussian complexity of the linear function in
each linear region. In practice, the feature map before the
global average pool layer (pre-GAP) is adopted to avoid in-
formation loss.
Computation Prior Motivated by NATSBench [8], we
found that the FLOPs of each subnet have a good correlation
with the accuracy of the standalone model. Using FLOPs as
prior to measure rank consistency is intuitive. Models with
high FLOPs usually have larger capacity and are likely to
achieve better performance.
Pairwise Rank Loss We ﬁrst revisit the ranking consis-
tency problem in One-shot NAS. Let Ωbe the search space,
deﬁned as N candidate architectures ai, i ∈[1, N]. Pair-
wise rank loss is used to constrain the optimization process
of supernet as a regular term. Assuming that the architec-
ture ai is better than the performance of the architecture aj,
then with the above ranking constraints, the following rela-
tionship is theoretically satisﬁed.

5:
Execute max-network, ˆy = Smax(x).
6:
Compute loss, loss = criterion(ˆy, y).
7:
Accumulate graidents, loss.backward().
8:
Stop graidents of ˆy as label, ˆy = ˆy.detach().
9:
Execute min-network, ¯y = Smin(x).
10:
Compute loss, loss = criterion(ˆy, ¯y).

11:
Accumulate gradients, loss.backward().
12:
while step i < (n −2) do
13:
Get n networks ai(i = 1, .., N) and their FLOPs
FLOPsi(i = 1, ..., N).
14:
Sample network based on probability pi
=
F LOP si
P

j F LOP sj
15:
Execute the sampled network, ˜y = Srand(x).
16:
Compute loss, loss = criterion(ˆy, ˜y).

17:
Accumulate gradients, loss.backward().
18:
end while
19:
while step i < m do
20:
Sample random network a and b.
21:
Execute random network, ya
= Sa(x), yb
=
Sb(x).
22:
Compute prior, ka = (Sa), kb = K(Sb).
23:
Compute loss, lossa = criterion(ya, y), lossb =
criterion(yb, y).
24:
Compute rank loss,
lossr
=
λR(a,b)
=
λLr(ka, kb, lossa, lossb).

LA

x, θ∗
ai

≤LA

x, θ∗
aj

⇒L

x, θs
ai

≤L

x, θs
aj


(1)
where LA denotes the real accuracy corresponding to
stand alone training, and L denotes the corresponding loss
function ranking in the supernet. Then the loss functions
computed by architecture ai and architecture aj are as fol-
lows:

25:
Accumulate gradients, lossr.backward().
26:
end while
27:
Update weights, optimizer.step().
28:
Clear graidents, optimizer.zero grad().
29: end while

R(i,j) (θs) = max

0, L

x, θs
ai

−L

x, θs
aj

(2)

of the 3rd block is ranging from 2 to 8. The candidate ex-
pansion ratio is, [1.0, 0.95, 0.9, 0.85, 0.8, 0.75, 0.7] and the
channel number should be divided by 8. There are around
5.06 × 1019 sub-networks in total.
Dataset. ImageNet-mini has 34,745 training images and
3,923 validation images in 1000 classes with resolution
224 × 224. We use the ofﬁcial training/validation split pro-
vided by Kaggle in our experiments.
Training Settings. For all experiments, we use the SGD
optimizer with momentum 0.9; weight decay 0; initial
learning rate 0.001 with batch size 256.
We use cosing
learning rate decay with warmup for 5 epochs. We ﬁrst pre-

We introduce the balanced sampling strategy with Sand-
wich Rule and pairwise rank loss described by Algorithm
1.

4. Experiments

Search Space. The Search Space is builded based on the
ResNet48 backbone. Both the depth and the expansion ra-
tios are searchable. There are 4 stages in the backbone. The
basic channel conﬁguration of 4 stages is 64, 128, 256 and
512. The candidate block number of the 1st, 2nd and 4th
block is ranging from 2 to 5 and the candidate block number

Results of Loss coefﬁcient λ and schedulers. In Table 3,
we compare four different coefﬁcient schedulers: constant
regularization throughout training, warm-up scheduler that
gradually increases regularization, cosine scheduler that in-
creases and then decreases, and multistage scheduler which
consists of zero stage, warm-up stage, constant stage and
decreasing stage. For the warm-up scheduler, we gradually
increase the loss from 0 to λmax = 2 linearly in the ﬁrst 20
epochs to avoid an abrupt change of the loss. In the initial
phase of the training supernet, the coefﬁcient should grad-
ually increase to avoid an abrupt change of the loss. As
shown in Table 3, the warm-up scheduler gives the best re-
sults. We used this strategy in our experiments.

train the supernet for 90 epochs in ImageNet-1k, and then
training supernet with the Sandwich Rule for 70 epochs.
Following the investigation in NASVIT [11], stronger reg-
ularization(e.g., large weight decay, dropout, dropPath) and
stronger data augmentation schemes(e.g., CutMix, Mixup,
Randaugment) are not utilized in our experiments.
Validation Metrics Following the setting of CVPR2022
challenge, the correlation of the rank consistency in One-
shot NAS is quantiﬁed with the Pearson correlation coef-
ﬁcient. In these metrics, the rank correlation is bounded
between -1 (disagreement) and 1 (agreement), where for 0
there is no signiﬁcant correlation.

4.1. Results of Prior-Guided NAS

We evaluate the effectiveness of smoother activation
functions, balanced sampling strategy and rank loss with
different schedulers.
Results of Different Activations The experimental results
are shown in Table 1, where the original ReLU activation
function is replaced with multiple smoother activation func-
tions. From the table, we observe that all of the activation
functions achieve better rank consistency, which prove that
information loss caused by ReLU would reduce the ranking
correlation of sub-networks in supernet.

Fig. 4. Different schedules of the loss coefﬁcient λ.

Type
Schedule
Pearson Coeff.

Constant
81.97
Warmup
83.20
Cosine
81.31
MultiStage
81.01

Rank Loss

Activation
Pearson Coeff.
ReLU
78.20
SELU
79.89
PReLU
80.65
Swish
80.60
Mish
81.56

Table 3. Inﬂuence of the loss coefﬁcient λ. Different schedules
(c.f. top plots) to modify the regularization throughout training.

Results of different prior for guiding We investigate the
impact of different priors in Table 4. The Params, FLOPs
and Zen-Score of sub-networks are adopted as zero-cost
proxy and positively correlate with the model accuracy.
Among them, FLOPs and Zen-Score achieve competitive
results and are used as prior in rank loss. Performance con-
sistently improves with the help of rank loss, which high-
lights the importance of prior.

Table 1. Inﬂuence of different types of activation functions.

Results of Different Sample Strategy The sampling strat-
egy plays an important role in optimizing the supernet. The
comparison results with the state-of-the-art sampling strate-
gies are shown in Table 2. It is surprising that the progres-
sive shrinking strategy in Once for all [2] obtain unsatisfac-
tory results, which may indicate that although the One-stage
NAS can converge well, the ranking consistency is not guar-
anteed. Instead, our balanced sampling strategy based on
Sandwich Rule achieve good results. Speciﬁcally, we take
the number of random sampled subnets as 2 and get two
pairs for rank loss.

Type
Prior
Pearson Coeff.

w/o Rank Loss
Params
67.23
FLOPs
78.43
Zen-Score
81.29

w/ Rank Loss
w/o Prior
80.65
FLOPs Guided
83.20
Zen-Score Guided
83.00

Sample Strategy
Pearson Coeff.
Uniform Sampling [12]
72.49
Progressive Shrinking [2]
69.03
Sandwich Rule [27]
78.20
Balanced Sampling
81.63

Table 4. Comparison of different types of prior.

Visualization of ranking correlation Table 4 illustrates
that the ranking correlation of Zen-Score is better than
FLOPs without the guide of rank loss. However, FLOPs

Table 2. Inﬂuence of different sample strategies.

guided rank loss achieves a better ranking correlation than
Zen-Score guided rank loss. Figure 5 shows the correla-
tion between different types of priors. Although the corre-
lation between Zen-Score and FLOPs is as high as 95.97,
they have different tendencies. The FLOPs proxy is con-
tinuous while the Zen-Score proxy concentrate on certain
values that results in a ribbon pattern.

[6] Xiangxiang Chu, Bo Zhang, Ruijun Xu, and Jixiang Li. Fair-
nas: Rethinking evaluation fairness of weight sharing neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01845, 2019.
2
[7] Zixiang Ding, Yaran Chen, Nannan Li, Dongbin Zhao, Zhi-
quan Sun, and CL Philip Chen. Bnas: Efﬁcient neural archi-
tecture search using broad scalable architecture. IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2021. 1
[8] Xuanyi Dong, Lu Liu, Katarzyna Musial, and Bogdan
Gabrys. Nats-bench: Benchmarking nas algorithms for ar-
chitecture topology and size. IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, PP, 2021. 4
[9] Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang.
One-shot neural architecture
search via self-evaluated template network. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 3681–3690, 2019. 1
[10] Jun Fu, Jing Liu, Jie Jiang, Yong Li, Yongjun Bao, and Han-
qing Lu. Scene segmentation with dual relation-aware atten-
tion network. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, pages
1–14, 2020. 2
[11] Chengyue Gong, Dilin Wang, Meng Li, Xinlei Chen,
Zhicheng Yan, Yuandong Tian, Vikas Chandra, et al. Nasvit:
Neural architecture search for efﬁcient vision transformers
with gradient conﬂict aware supernet training. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 5
[12] Zichao Guo, Xiangyu Zhang, Haoyuan Mu, Wen Heng,
Zechun Liu, Yichen Wei, and Jian Sun. Single path one-
shot neural architecture search with uniform sampling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.00420, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 5
[13] Hongwei Hu, Bo Ma, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao. Man-
ifold regularized correlation object tracking. IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks, 29(5):1786–1795, 2018. 2
[14] Hanliang Jiang, Fuhao Shen, Fei Gao, and Weidong Han.
Learning efﬁcient, explainable and discriminative represen-
tations for pulmonary nodules classiﬁcation. Pattern Recog-
nition, 113:107825, 2021. 1
[15] Ming Lin, Pichao Wang, Zhenhong Sun, Hesen Chen, Xi-
uyu Sun, Qi Qian, Hao Li, and Rong Jin.
Zen-nas: A
zero-shot nas for high-performance image recognition. 2021
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 337–346, 2021. 4
[16] Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig
Adam, Wei Hua, Alan L Yuille, and Li Fei-Fei.
Auto-
deeplab: Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic
image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 82–92,
2019. 1
[17] Hanxiao
Liu,
Karen
Simonyan,
and
Yiming
Yang.
Darts: Differentiable architecture search.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.09055, 2018. 1, 2
[18] Jiaheng Liu, Shunfeng Zhou, Yichao Wu, Ken Chen, Wanli
Ouyang, and Dong Xu. Block proposal neural architecture
search. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 30:15–25,
2020. 1
[19] Renqian Luo, Tao Qin, and Enhong Chen. Balanced one-shot
neural architecture optimization. arXiv: Learning, 2019. 3

Fig. 5. Correlation between different types of priors.

5. Conclusion

In this paper, we propose Prior-Guided One-shot NAS
(PGONAS) to improve the ranking correlation of super-
net. First, we explore the effect of the location and type
of smoother activation functions on the ranking correlation.
Second, we propose a balanced sampling strategy based on
the Sandwich Rule to alleviate weight coupling in the su-
pernet. Finally, FLOPs and Zen-Score are adopted as be-
fore to guide the training of supernet with rank loss, which
consistently improves the ranking correlation. Detailed ex-
periments demonstrate that the above methods can improve
the ranking correlation of sub-networks in weights inherit-
ing and stand-alone training. In the future, we will further
explore traing-free metrics and training strategies for super-
nets. We hope that our approach will attract the attention of
the research community for NAS and new insight.

References

[1] Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Barret Zoph, Vijay
Vasudevan, and Quoc Le. Understanding and simplifying
one-shot architecture search. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 549–558, 2018. 2
[2] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Once for all: Train
one network and specialize it for efﬁcient deployment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.09791, 2019. 3, 5
[3] Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. Proxylessnas: Direct
neural architecture search on target task and hardware. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.00332, 2018. 1
[4] Wuyang Chen, Xinyu Gong, and Zhangyang Wang. Neural
architecture search on imagenet in four gpu hours: A theo-
retically inspired perspective. ArXiv, abs/2102.11535, 2021.
4
[5] Yifang Chen, Zheng Wang, Z Jane Wang, and Xiangui
Kang.
Automated design of neural network architectures
with reinforcement learning for detection of global manip-
ulations. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Process-
ing, 14(5):997–1011, 2020. 1

[20] Joseph Charles Mellor, Jack Turner, Amos J. Storkey, and El-
liot J. Crowley. Neural architecture search without training.
ArXiv, abs/2006.04647, 2021. 4
[21] Hieu Pham, Melody Y Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V Le, and
Jeff Dean. Efﬁcient neural architecture search via parameter
sharing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03268, 2018. 1
[22] Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang,
Fei Sun, Yiming Wu, Yuandong Tian, Peter Vajda, Yangqing
Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. Fbnet: Hardware-aware efﬁcient con-
vnet design via differentiable neural architecture search. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 10734–10742, 2019. 1, 2
[23] Yuhui Xu, Lingxi Xie, Wenrui Dai, Xiaopeng Zhang, Xin
Chen, Guo-Jun Qi, Hongkai Xiong, and Qi Tian. Partially-
connected neural architecture search for reduced computa-
tional redundancy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 2021. 1
[24] Ziwei Yang, Ruyi Zhang, Zhi Yang, Xubo Yang, Lei Wang,
and Zheyang Li.
Improving ranking correlation of super-
net with candidates enhancement and progressive training.
ArXiv, abs/2108.05866, 2021. 3
[25] Qing Ye, Yanan Sun, Jixin Zhang, and Jian Cheng Lv. A
distributed framework for ea-based nas. IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2020. 1
[26] Jiahui Yu and Thomas Huang. Autoslim: Towards one-shot
architecture search for channel numbers. arXiv: Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019. 2, 3
[27] Jiahui Yu, Pengchong Jin, Hanxiao Liu, Gabriel Bender,
Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Mingxing Tan, Thomas Huang, Xi-
aodan Song, and Quoc V. Le. Bignas: Scaling up neural
architecture search with big single-stage models. In ECCV,
2020. 1, 3, 5
[28] Miao Zhang, Huiqi Li, Shirui Pan, Xiaojun Chang, Chuan
Zhou, Zongyuan Ge, and Steven W Su. One-shot neural ar-
chitecture search: Maximising diversity to overcome catas-
trophic forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 2020. 1
[29] Man Zhang, Yong Zhou, Jiaqi Zhao, Shixiong Xia, Jiaqi
Wang, and Zizheng Huang.
Semi-supervised blockwisely
architecture search for efﬁcient lightweight generative adver-
sarial network. Pattern Recognition, 112:107794, 2021. 1
[30] Zhong-Qiu Zhao, Peng Zheng, Shou-Tao Xu, and Xindong
Wu. Object detection with deep learning: A review. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 30(11):3212–3232, 2019.
2
[31] Zhao Zhong, Zichen Yang, Boyang Deng, Junjie Yan, Wei
Wu, Jing Shao, and Cheng-Lin Liu.
Blockqnn: Efﬁcient
block-wise neural network architecture generation.
IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
2020. 1