SE(3)-DiffusionFields: Learning smooth cost functions for
joint grasp and motion optimization through diffusion

Julen Urain∗1, Niklas Funk∗1, Jan Peters1,2,3,4, Georgia Chalvatzaki1

arXiv:2209.03855v4 [cs.RO] 18 Jun 2023

Fig. 1: Pick and place task in which the robot has to pick a mug and move it to the target pose (in the shelves) without colliding. We exploit diffusion
models for jointly optimizing both grasp and motion and show the successful trajectory from left to right.

Abstract— Multi-objective optimization problems are ubiqui-
tous in robotics, e.g., the optimization of a robot manipulation
task requires a joint consideration of grasp pose configurations,
collisions and joint limits. While some demands can be easily
hand-designed, e.g., the smoothness of a trajectory, several
task-specific objectives need to be learned from data. This
work introduces a method for learning data-driven SE(3) cost
functions as diffusion models. Diffusion models can represent
highly-expressive multimodal distributions and exhibit proper
gradients over the entire space due to their score-matching
training objective. Learning costs as diffusion models allows
their seamless integration with other costs into a single differen-
tiable objective function, enabling joint gradient-based motion
optimization. In this work, we focus on learning SE(3) diffusion
models for 6DoF grasping, giving rise to a novel framework
for joint grasp and motion optimization without needing to de-
couple grasp selection from trajectory generation. We evaluate
the representation power of our SE(3) diffusion models w.r.t.
classical generative models, and we showcase the superior per-
formance of our proposed optimization framework in a series
of simulated and real-world robotic manipulation tasks against
representative baselines. Videos, code and additional details are
available at:

I. INTRODUCTION

Autonomous robot manipulation tasks usually involve
complex actions requiring a set of sequential or recurring
subtasks to be achieved while satisfying certain constraints,
thus, casting robot manipulation into a multi-objective mo-
tion optimization problem [1]–[3]. Let us consider the pick-
and-place task in Fig. 1, for which the motion optimization
should consider the possible set of grasping and placing
poses, the trajectories’ smoothness, collision avoidance with
the environment, and the robot’s joint limits. While some
objectives are easy to model (e.g., joint limits, smoothness),

qσk(ˆx) =
Z

x
N(ˆx|x, σkI)ρD(x)dx. To sample from the per-

turbed distribution, qσk(ˆx) we first sample from the data
distribution x ∼ρD(x) and then add white noise ˆx = x + ϵ
with ϵ ∼N(0, σkI). Next, we estimate the score function of
each noise perturbed distribution ∇x log qσk(x) by training a
noise-conditioned vector field sθ(x, k), by score matching
sθ(x, k) ≈∇x log qσk(x) for all k = 1, . . . , L. The training
objective of DSM [26] is

L
X

Ldsm = 1

k=0
Ex,ˆx



sθ(ˆx, k) −∇ˆx log N(ˆx|x, σ2
kI)



,
(1)

L

with x ∼ρD(x) and ˆx ∼N(x, σkI) To generate samples from
the trained model, we apply Annealed Langevin Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [28]. We first draw an initial set
of samples from a distribution xL ∼ρL(x) and then, simulate
an inverse Langevin diffusion process for L steps, from k = L
to k = 1

xk−1 = xk + α2
k
2 sθ(xk, k) + αkϵ , ϵ ∼N(0, I),
(2)

with αk > 0 a step dependent coefficient. Overall, DSM
Eq. (1) learns models that output vectors pointing towards
the samples of the training dataset ρD(x) [22].
SE(3) Lie group. The SE(3) Lie group is prevalent in
robotics. A point H =
R t
0 1

∈SE(3) represents the full
pose (position and orientation) of an object or robot link with
R ∈SO(3) the rotation matrix and t ∈R3 the 3D position. A
Lie group encompasses the concepts of group and smooth
manifold in a unique body. Lie groups are smooth manifolds
whose elements have to fulfil certain constraints. Moving
along the constrained manifold is achieved by selecting any
velocity withing the space tangent to the manifold at H
(i.e., the so-called tangent space). The tangent space at the
identity is called Lie algebra and noted se(3). The Lie algebra
has a non-trivial structure, but is isomorphic to the vector
space R6 in which we can apply linear algebra. As in [29],
we work in the vector space R6 instead of the Lie algebra
se(3). We can move the elements between the Lie group
and the vector space with the logarithmic and exponential
maps, Logmap : SE(3) −→R6 and Expmap : R6 −→SE(3) respec-
tively [29]. A Gaussian distribution on Lie groups can be
defined as

q(H|Hµ, Σ) ∝exp

−0.5


Logmap(H−1
µ H)


2

Σ−1


,
(3)

II. PRELIMINARIES

Hk−1 = Expmap
α2
k
2 sθ(Hk, k) + αkϵ

Hk,
(6)

with ϵ ∈R6 sampled from ϵ ∼N(0, I) and the step de-
pendent coefficient αk > 0. By iteratively applying Eq. (6),
we move a set of randomly sampled SE(3) poses to the data
distribution ρD(H) (See Fig. 2).
From the score function to energy model. While most of
the works in learning diffusion models learn a vector field
representing the score sθ, in our work, we learn a scalar
field that represents the energy of the distribution Eθ. In
contrast with learning a score function, learning an Energy
Based Models (EBM) allow us evaluating the quality of the
generated samples and compose it with other cost functions
for multi-objective motion optimization. To learn an EBM
with denoising score matching, we model our score function
sθ(H, k) = −DEθ(H, k)/DH, as the derivative of the
EBM Eθ.

Fig. 2: Generating high quality SE(3) grasp poses by iteratively refining
random initial samples (k=L) with an inverse Langevin diffusion process
over SE(3) elements (Eq. (6)).

III. SE(3)-DIFFUSION FIELDS

In this section, we show how to adapt diffusion models
to the Lie group SE(3) [29], as it is a crucial space for
robot manipulation. The SE(3) space is not Euclidean, hence,
multiple design choices need to be considered for adapting
Euclidean diffusion models. In the following, we first explain
the required modifications (Section III-A). Then, we propose
a neural network architecture for learning SE(3) diffusion
models that represent 6DoF grasp pose distributions and
show how we train it (Sec. III-B). Finally, we show how
to integrate the learned diffusion models into a grasp and
motion optimization problem and show how to optimize it
jointly considering the grasp and the motion (Sec. III-C).

B. Architecture & training of Grasp SE(3)-DiffusionFields

Even though we can represent any data-driven cost in
SE(3) with SE(3)-DiffusionFields (SE(3)-DiF), in this work,
we focus on cost functions that capture 6DoF grasp pose
distributions conditioned on the object we aim to grasp. In
this work, we assume to have access to the object pose,
a reasonable assumption thanks to the impressive results
in 6DoF object pose estimation and segmentation [32]. We
defer studying the perception aspect of encoding point clouds
into object pose and shape as in [6], [33] for a future work.
We illustrate the architecture for our grasp SE(3)-DiF model
in Fig. 3 and the training pipeline in Algorithm 1. The
proposed model maps an object (represented by its id and
pose) and a 6DoF grasp pose H ∈SE(3) to an energy e ∈R,
that measures the grasp quality for the particular object.
We train the model to jointly match the Signed Distance
Field (SDF) of the object we aim to grasp and predict
the grasp energy level by the DSM loss Eq. (5). Learning
jointly the SDF of the object and the grasp pose improves
the quality of the grasp generation [33], [34]. During the
training, we assume the object’s id m and pose Ho
w∈SE(3)
are available, and we retrieve a learnable object shape code
zm given the index m as in [35]. For training the SDF loss,
we apply a supervised learning pipeline. Given a dataset
of 3D points xw ∈R3 and sdf ∈R for a particular object
m, Dm
sdf : (xw, sdf), we first map the points to the object’s
reference frame xo = Ho
wxw and then predict the SDF given
the feature encoder Fθ (See Algorithm 1).
As previously introduced in Eq. (5), to apply the DSM
loss, we compute the energy e ∈R over the grasp poses

A. From Euclidean diffusion to diffusion in SE(3)

A diffusion model in SE(3) is a vector field that outputs
a vector v ∈R6 for an arbitrary query point H ∈SE(3), i.e.,
v = sθ(H, k) with a scalar conditioning variable k determin-
ing the current noise scale [24].
Denoising Score Matching in SE(3). Similar to the Eu-
clidean space version (cf. Sec. II), DSM is applied in two
phases. We first generate a perturbed data point in SE(3),
i.e., sample from the Gaussian on Lie groups Eq. (3),

ˆ
H ∼q( ˆ
H|H, σkI) with mean H ∈ρD(H) and standard de-
viation σk for noise scale k. Practically, we sample from this
distribution using a white noise vector ϵ ∈R6,

ˆ
H = HExpmap(ϵ) , ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
kI).
(4)

Following the idea of DSM, the model is trained to match the
score of the perturbed training data distribution. Thus, DSM
in SE(3) requires computing the derivatives of the perturbed
distribution w.r.t. a Lie group element. Hence, the new DSM
loss function on Lie groups equates to

"




sθ( ˆ
H, k) −D log q( ˆ
H|H, σkI)

L
X

#

Ldsm = 1

k=0
EH, ˆ
H

, (5)

D ˆ
H

L

with H ∼ρD(H) and
ˆ
H ∼q( ˆ
H|H, σkI). Note that, as in-
troduced in Sec. II, the derivatives w.r.t. a SE(3) element

Fig. 3: SE(3)-DiF’s architecture for learning 6D grasp pose distributions. We train the model to jointly learn the objects’ sdf and to minimize the denoising
loss. Given grasp pose H∈SE(3) we transform it to a set of 3D points xw∈RN×3 (I). Next, we transform the points into the object’s local frame, using
the object’s pose Ho
w. Given the resulting points xo and the object’s shape code z we apply the feature encoder Fθ (II) to obtain a object and grasp-related
features (sdf, ψ)∈RN×(ψ+1). Finally, (III) we flatten the features and compute the energy e through the decoder Dθ. We provide a point-cloud-based
implementation in our code repository: diffusion.

grasp pose to a fixed set of N 3D-points around the gripper
xg∈RN×3 in the world frame xw=Hxg. We thereby express
the grasp pose through a set of 3D points’ positions, similar
to [34]. Then, we move the points to the object’s local frame,
xom=Hom
w xw. (II) We apply the feature encoding network
Fθ which is also conditioned on zm and k to inform about
the object shape and noise level, respectively. The encoding
network outputs both the SDF predictions for the query
points, sdf∈RN×1, and a set of additional features ψ∈RN×ψ.
Thus, the feature encoder’s output is of size N×(1 + ψ). (III)
We flatten the features and pass them through the decoder
Dθ to obtain the scalar energy value e. Given the energy, we
compute the DSM loss Eq. (5). During training, we jointly
learn the objects’ latent codes zm, and the parameters θ of
the feature encoder Fθ and decoder Dθ.

with weights ωj > 0. Herein, we integrate the learned SE(3)-
DiF for grasp generation as one cost term of the objective
function. It is, thus, combined with other heuristic costs, e.g.,
collision avoidance or trajectory smoothness. Optimizing
over the whole set of costs enables obtaining optimal trajec-
tories jointly taking into account grasping, as well as motion-
related objectives. This differs from classic grasp and motion
planning approaches in which the grasp pose sampling
and trajectory planning are treated separately [36], by first
sampling the grasp pose, and, then, searching for a trajectory
that satisfies the selected grasp. In classic approaches, given
the grasp sampling is decoupled from the trajectory planning,
it might happen the sampled grasps to be unfeasible for
the problem, leading to an unsolvable trajectory planning
problem. We hypothesize that jointly optimizing over both
the grasp pose and the trajectory allows us to be more sample
efficient w.r.t. decoupled approaches.
Given that the learned function is in SE(3) while the
optimization is w.r.t. the robot’s joint space, we redefine the
cost as c(qt, k) = Eθ(ϕee(qt), k), with the forward kinematics
ϕee : Rdq −→SE(3) mapping from robot configuration to the
robot’s end-effectors task space. To obtain minimum cost
trajectories, we frame the motion generation problem as
an inverse diffusion process. Using a planning-as-inference
view [23], [37]–[39], we define a desired target distribution
as q(τ|k) ∝exp(−J (τ, k)). This allows us to set an inverse
Langevin diffusion process that evolves a set of random
initial particles drawn from a distribution τL ∼pL(τ) towards
the target distribution q(τ|k)

Algorithm 1: Grasp SE(3)-DiF Training

Given: θ0: initial params for z, Fθ, Dθ;
Datasets: Do : {m, Ho
w}, object ids and poses,
Dm
sdf : {x, sdf}, 3D positions x and sdf for object m,
Dm
g : {H} succesful grasp poses for object m;

1 for s ←0 to S −1 do

2
k, σk ←[0, . . . , L];
//
sample noise scale

3
m, Ho
w ∈Do;
//
sample objects ids and poses

4
z = shape codes(m);
//
get shape codes

5
SDF train

6
x, sdf ∈Dm
sdf ;
//
get 3D points and sdf for obj. m

7
ˆ
sdf,
= Fθ(Ho
wx, z, k);
//
get predicted sdf

8
Lsdf = Lmse( ˆ
sdf, sdf);
//
compute sdf error

9
Grasp diffusion train

10
H ∼Dm
g ;
//
Sample success grasp poses for obj. m

11
ϵ ∼N(0, σkI);
//
sample white noise on k scale

12
ˆ
H = HExpmap(ϵ);
//
perturb grasp pose Eq. (4)

τk−1 = τk + 0.5 α2
k∇τk log q(τ|k) + αkϵ , ϵ ∼N(0, I),
(7)

13
xo
n = ˆ
Hxn;
//
Transform to N 3d points (see Figure 3)

14
ˆ
sdf n, ψn = Fθ(xo
n, zb, k);
//
get features

15
Ψ = Flatten( ˆ
sdf n, ψn);
//
Flatten the features

with step dependent coefficient αk > 0, noise level moving
from k = L to k = 1, and one particle corresponding to an
entire trajectory. If we evolve the particles by this inverse
diffusion process for sufficient steps, the particles at k = 1,
τ1 can be considered as particles sampled from q(τ|k = 1).
To obtain the optimal trajectory, we evaluate the samples on
J (τ, 1) and pick the one with the lowest cost.

16
e = Dθ(Ψ);
//
compute energy

17
Ldsm = Ldsm(e, ˆ
H, H, σk);
//
Compute dsm loss Eq. (5)

18
Parameter update

19
L = Ldsm + Lsdf;
//
Sum losses

20
θs+1 = θs −α∇θL;
//
Update parameters

21 return θ∗;

C. Grasp and motion optimization with diffusion models

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

Fig. 4: 6D grasp pose generation experiment. Left: Success rate evaluation.
Right: Earth Mover Distance (EMD) evaluation metrics (lower is better).

Fig. 5: Evaluation Pick in occlusion. We measure the success rate of 4
different methods based on different number of initializations.

simulation-based dataset contains successful 6DoF grasp
poses for a variety of objects from ShapeNet [40]. We
focus on the collection of successful grasp poses for 90
different mugs (approximately 90K 6DoF grasp poses). We
provide a model trained in a larger dataset and conditioned
on point cloud in the project page. We obtain the mugs’
meshes from ShapeNet, and train the model as described
in Algorithm 1. We generate a set of grasp poses from the
learned models and evaluate on successful grasping and di-
versity. Second, we evaluate the quality of our trained model
when used as an additional cost term for grasp and motion
optimization (Sec. IV-B). We compare the performance of
solving a grasp and motion optimization problem jointly
(using the learned model as cost function), w.r.t. the state-
of-the-art approaches that decouple the grasp selection and
motion planning, or heuristically combine them. Finally, we
validate the performance of our method in a set of real robot
experiments (Sec. IV-C).

are often in collision with the mug. In the case of classifier
only, the success rate is low. We hypothesize that this might
be related with the classifier’s gradient, as specifically in
regions far from good samples, the field has a large plateau
with close to zero slopes [14]. This leads to not being able
to improve the initial samples. Considering grasp diversity,
i.e., EMD metric (lower is better), SE(3)-DiF outperforms all
baselines significantly. A reason for the difference, might be
that VAE+Refine overfits to specific overrepresented modes
of the data distribution. In contrast, SE(3)-DiF’s samples
capture the data distribution more properly. We, therefore,
conclude that SE(3)-DiF is indeed generating high-quality
and diverse grasp poses. We add an extended presentation of
the experiment in the Appendix in our project site.

B. Performance on grasp and motion optimization

A. Evaluation of 6DoF grasp pose generation

Fig. 6: Simulated and real robot environments for picking amidst clutter.

requires 25 particles to match the success rate of the de-
coupled approach with 800 particles. The reason for this
significant gap in efficiency is that the decoupled approach
generates SE(3) grasp poses that are not feasible given the
environment constraints, such as clutter or joint limits. How-
ever, when optimizing jointly, we can find trajectories that
satisfy all the costs by iteratively improving entire trajectories
w.r.t. all objectives. We also observe the importance of using
grasp SE(3)-DiF as cost term instead of a grasp classifier. The
classifier model lacks proper gradient information to inform
how to move the trajectories to grasp the object due to its
lack of smoothness in the whole space. Thus, the motion
optimization problem is unable to find solutions.

V. RELATED WORK

Diffusion models in Robotics Diffusion models have ap-
peared in Robotics in various tasks, from text-conditioned
scene rearrangement [48], [49], decision-making [23], [50],
[51] and controllable traffic generation [52]. We additionally
highlight earlier works like [53], where a diffusion process
is integrated into a motion planning problem.
6D grasp generation. 6D grasp pose generation is solved
with a myriad of methods from classifiers to explicit sam-
plers. [44], [54], [55] sample candidate grasps and score
them with learned classifiers. [56] predicts grasping out-
comes using a geometry-aware representation. Contrary to
methods classifying grasps, generative models can be trained
to generate grasp poses from data [6] but might require
additional sample refinement. While the generator in [43]
considers possible collisions in the scene, [57] proposes to
learn a grasp distribution over the object’s manifold. [33]
uses scene representation learning to learn grasp qualities
and explicitly predict 3D rotations. Recently, [58] proposed
learning a 6 DoF SDF to represent grasp pose generation as
a smooth cost function and optimize on top of it.
Integrated grasp and motion planning. Due to the in-
terdependence of the selected grasp pose with the robot
motion, multiple efforts have tried to integrate both variables
into a single planning problem [47], [59]–[62]. In [59],
[60], goal sets representing grasp poses are integrated as
constraints in a motion optimization problem. In [61], [63],
Rapidly-exploring Random Trees [64] is combined with a
TCP attractor to bias the tree towards good grasps.

C. Grasp and motion optimization on real robots

We conducted a thorough real-world evaluation of our
joint grasp and motion optimization framework driven by our
6DoF grasp diffusion model, using it as an additional cost
function, similarly to our simulated robot manipulation tasks.
Fig. 1 depicts a sequence of a real-world pick-mug and place-
on-shelf scenario. Overall, the experiments aim at assessing
the method’s capabilities in realistic conditions that include,
i) non-perfect state information, as the mugs pose is retrieved
from an external system (Optitrack) which induces small
calibration errors, ii) variations in the mug’s shape, as we
use a mug that is slightly different from the one we specify
for SE(3)-DiF, and iii) real-world trajectory execution. For
optimization, we initialize 800 particles (trajectories), and
only execute the one with lowest cost.
In the simplest testing scenario, where the robot has to pick
up a mug from various poses in a scene without any clutter,
we achieve 100% (20 successes / 20 trials) pickup-success.
We also find that our method transfers well to the more
difficult scenarios of picking up mugs that are initially placed
upside down with 90% (18/20) success, picking in occluded
scenes with 95% (19/20) success, and having to pick and
place the mug in a desired pose inside the shelf of Fig. 1
with 100% (20/20) success. Our real-world results underline
the effectiveness of our joint optimization approach. Videos
of the experiments also showcase that our method still comes
up with very versatile solutions1. Note that we attribute the
increased real-world performance w.r.t. the simulated one to
the simpler designed experimental scene, i.e., in simulation
we considered flying obstacles that were not realizable in
the real scene (Fig. 6). Nevertheless, our results confirm that

VI. CONCLUSION

The Lie group SE(3) is prevalent in robotics. A point H ∈SE(3) represents the full pose (position and orientation) of an
object or robot link


∈SE(3)
(8)

H =
R
t
0
1

with R ∈SO(3) the rotation matrix and t ∈R3 the 3D position. A Lie group is both a group and a differentiable
manifold (See [29] for additional details on groups). Given SE(3) is a differentiable manifold, for any point H ∈SE(3),
there exists a tangent space centered around H that is locally diffeomorphic to SE(3). The tangent space can be afterwards
map to a Cartesian vector space R6. In particular, the tangent space at identity is known as Lie algebra and is noted by
se(3).
We can interact between the Lie group and the Lie algebra through the logmap and expmap functions. The logmap is a
function that maps a point H ∈SE(3) to the Lie algebra se(3), logmap : SE(3) −→se(3). Inversely, the expmap moves the
points h∧∈se(3) to the Lie group SE(3), expmap : se(3) −→SE(3). Additionally, we can relate the elements in the Lie
algebra se(3) with the Cartesian vector space R6 through the hat and vee functions. The hat function (·)∧: R6 −→se(3) maps
the points in the vector space h ∈R6 to the Lie algebra se(3). Inversely, the vee function (.)∨: se(3) −→R6, moves the
points in the Lie algebra h∧∈se(3) to the vector space R6. The vector space R6 is isomorphic to se(3). Then, we can move
any point from se(3) to R6 and back. Nevertheless, h ∈R6 representation is more useful in our case as we can apply Linear
algebra on them. Finally, we additionally call Logmap the map from SE(3) to R6, Logmap = logmap(.)∨: SE(3) −→R6

and Expmap the map from R6 to SE(3), Expmap = expmap(.∧) : R6 −→SE(3). Note that we use the upper case (Logmap,
Expmap) to represent a mapping to the vector space and the lower case (logmap, expmap) to represent the mapping to the
Lie algebra.
A vector field f : SE(3) −→R6 is a function that outputs a vector in the Cartesian vector space R6 for any point in SE(3).
The vector’s values are dependent on a particular tangent space centered at H ∈SE(3). Given that there exist infinite tangent
spaces (one per point in SE(3)), the value of the vectors might vary depending on the tangent space. We can transform the
vectors related with one tangent space to another, with the adjoint matrix operator. The adjoint matrix operator is a linear
map ˙h1 = A1
0 ˙h0, that transform a vector ˙h0 ∈R6 tied with the tangent space centered at H0 ∈SE(3) to the vector ˙h1 ∈R6

tied with the tangent space centered at H1 ∈SE(3).

A. Derivatives on Lie groups

To properly define derivatives on Lie groups, we are required to consider the geometry of the manifold. Given a function
f(·) : Rm −→Rn, the Jacobian is defined as

def
= lim
τ−→0
f(x + τ) −f(x)

J = ∂f(x)

τ
∈Rn×m,
(9)

∂x

with τ ∈Rm. Nevertheless, if we aim to compute the Jacobian on the SE(3) Lie group, we are required to adapt the
formulation, as we cannot directly sum x and τ. Given a function f(·) : M −→N from the manifold M to the manifold.
N, the Jacobian is defined as

τ
= lim
τ−→0
Logmap(f(X)−1f(Expmap(τ)X))

Df(X)

def
= lim
τ−→0
f(τ ⊕X) ⊖f(X)

τ
∈Rm×n,
(10)

DX

where m is the dimension of the manifold M and n, the dimension of the manifold N. X ∈M is an element in M and the
output f(X) ∈N an element in N. The plus ⊕and minus ⊖operators must be selected appropriately: ⊕for the domain
M and ⊖for the codomain N [29]. In our work, we derive assuming the left Jacobian (10); yet as presented in [29], it is
also possible to compute the right Jacobian. For the case of SE(3), the Jacobian of the function f will transform a vector
of dimension n to a vector in R6. Similarly, to functions mapping between Euclidean spaces, we can apply the chain rule
given functions that map between manifolds. Given Y = f(X) and Z = g(Y), the Jacobian of Z = g(f(X)) is defined

J = DZ

DX = DZ

DY
DY
DX = D(g(Y))

DY
D(f(X))

DX
,
(11)

To apply the score matching loss, we first sample a datapoint from a Gaussian distribution qσk(ˆx|x) = N(ˆx|x, σkI)
with the mean x ∼ρD(x) sampled from the data distribution. A sample from qσk(ˆx|x) can be easily obtain by perturbing
a datapoint from the demonstrations with white noise ˆx = x + ϵ with ϵ ∼N(0, σkI). Nevertheless, given SE(3) is not
an Euclidean space, we cannot directly sample from a Gaussian distribution as the generated sample might fall out of
the manifold. In our work, we adapt the Gaussian distribution to Lie Groups. Similarly to [30], we model the sampling
distribution in SE(3) as

qσk( ˆ
H|H) ∝exp

−1


,
(12)

Logmap(H−1 ˆ
H)



2

2

Σ−1

where Σ = σ2
kI the covariance matrix. Following the intuition from [30], as long as σk is small enough, the tails of the
distribution decay to zero along every geodesic path leading away from identity. We can sample from (12),

ˆ
H = HExpmap(ϵ) , ϵ ∼N(0, σkI),
(13)

by first converting a white noise sample to a SE(3) element, and then, perturbing the mean of the distribution H with
transformed white noise.
1) Score function in SE(3): The score matching loss encourages the gradient of the parameterized model DEθ(H)/DH
to match the score of the perturbed distribution (12). We call ϕ = Logmap(H−1 ˆ
H) and M = H−1 ˆ
H. We compute the
score function by the chain rule

DM
D(H−1 ˆ
H)

2 ∥ϕ∥2
Σ−1)
Dϕ
D(Logmap(M))

D log qσk( ˆ
H|H)

D ˆ
H
= D(−1

D ˆ
H
.
(14)

The first part can be directly computed in the Euclidean space

2 ∥ϕ∥2
Σ−1)
Dϕ
= ∂(−1

2 ∥ϕ∥2
Σ−1)
∂ϕ
= −ϕ

D(−1

σ2
k
(15)

that is the score function of a Gaussian distribution on Euclidean spaces. This is the score that is matched in [24]. The
second term
D(Logmap(M))

DM
= J−1
l
(ϕ)
(16)

is the inverse left-Jacobian on SE(3) (See [29]). The third term

D(H−1 ˆ
H)

D ˆ
H
= AdjH−1
(17)

is the adjoint over H−1.

APPENDIX II
ALGORITHMIC DETAILS

In this section, we provide the pseudocode for all 3 main algorithms (for training the diffusion models, for generating
grasp poses, and for handling motion optimization with diffusion).

A. Algorithmic implementation of the training procedure

Given: θ0: initial parameters of the function Eθ;
S: Optimization steps;
Dataset D : {{Hk,i}Ik
i=0, {xk,j, sdfk,j}Jk
j=0, ok}K
k=1: K objects, J 3D points xk,j ∈R3 per object with the sdfk,j ∈R SDF value
for each point. I Hk,i ∈SE(3) good grasp poses per object, ok ∈R object id.;
Ho
w = I: object’s pose set to identity for training.

1 for s ←0 to S −1 do

2
ob ∈D;
// Sample a minibatch of b objects ids

3
zb = shape codes(ob, θs);
// get all shape codes (see Figure 3)

4
xb,j, sdfb,j ∈D;
// SDF: Sample a minibatch of j 3D points and sdf per object

5
ˆ
sdf b,j,
= Fθ(xb,j, zb, k);
// SDF:get predicted sdf (see Figure 3)

6
lsdf = Lmse( ˆ
sdf b,j, sdfb,j);
// SDF:compute sdf error

7
Hb,i ∼D;
// DIF: Sample a minibatch of i grasp poses per object

8
k, σk ←[0, . . . , L];
// DIF:Sample a noise level

9
ϵb,i ∼N(0, σkI);
// DIF:sample a white noise

10
ˆ
Hb,i = Hb,iExpmap(ϵb,i);
// DIF:perturb grasp poses Eq. (4)

11
xo
b,i,n = Ho
w ˆ
Hb,ixn;
// DIF:Transform N 3d points (see Figure 3)

12
ˆ
sdf b,i,n, ϕb,i,n = Fθ(xo
b,i,n, zb, k);
// DIF:get latent features (see Figure 3)

13
Φb,i = Flatten( ˆ
sdf b,i,n, ϕb,i,n);
// DIF:Flatten the features (see Figure 3)

14
eb,i = Dθ(Φb,i);
// DIF:Compute energy (see Figure 3)

15
ldsm = Ldsm(eb,i, ˆ
Hb,i, Hb,i, σk);
// DIF:Compute dsm loss with Eq. (5)

16
l = ldsm + lsdf;
// Sum losses

17
θs+1 = θs −α∇θl;
// Update parameter θ

18 return θ∗;

the steps of sampling noise and perturbing the previously selected grasping poses (lines 8-10). Following our explanations
in Section III-B, we represent the SE(3) grasping poses through a collection of N 3D points that are sampled around the
gripper’s pose. We subsequently query our architecture to receive the features for each of these 3D points representing the
grasping pose. Subsequently, we combine all of these points corresponding to a single grasping pose through flattening to
obtain the predicted grasp quality (i.e., energy). We finally compute the DSM loss function, add the two objectives and
perform gradient descent to update our network’s parameters as well as the object’s shape codes.

B. Algorithmic implementation of 6D grasp generation using SE(3)-DiF

In Algorithm 3 we provide pseudocode for SE(3) grasp generation, closely following Section III-A. We nevertheless want
to point out that in some experiments in which also table collisions have to be considered, Eθ might consist of multiple
terms and therefore not only represent the energies output by our learned diffusion model.

Algorithm 3: SE(3) grasp generation pipeline

Given: {σk}L
k=1: Noise levels;
L: Diffusion steps;
ϵ: step rate;
Initialize ns initial samples Hns
L ∼pL(H)

1 for k ←L to 1 do

2
ens = Eθ(Hns
k , k);
// Compute the energy per Hns
k
3
αk = ϵ · σk/σL;
// Select step size αk

4
ϵ ∼N(0, I);
// Sample white noise vector of size R6

5
Hns
k−1 = Expmap

−
α2
k
2
Dens
DHns
k
+ αkϵ

Hns
k ,;
// Make a ld step

6 return Hns
0 ;

C. Algorithmic implementation of robot trajectory optimization using SE(3)-DiF

Given: {σk}L
k=1: Noise levels;
L: Diffusion steps;
T: trajectory lenght;
Q: dimension of the configuration space;
ϵ: step rate;
Initialize ns initial samples τ ns
L
∼pL(τ) of size Q × T each

1 for k ←L to 1 do

2
cns = J (τ ns
k , k);
// Compute the total cost per τ ns
k
3
αk = ϵ · σk/σL;
// Select step size αk

4
ϵ ∼N(0, I);
// Sample white noise vector of size RQ×T

5
τ ns
k−1 = τ ns
k
+ 1

2α2
k∇τkcns + αkϵ;
// Make a ld step

6 return arg minτ ns
0
J (τ ns
0 , 0);

Fig. 7: A frame of the grasp success evaluation for the model SE(3)-DiF in Nvidia Isaac Sim.

APPENDIX III
EXTENDED EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

A. Evaluation of SE(3)-DiffusionFields as 6D grasp pose generative models

In the following, we provide an extended presentation of the experiment in Section IV-A. We measure the success rate
with the physics simulator Nvidia Isaac Sim. We present a visualization of the evaluation environment in Figure 7. To
evaluate the success rate of each model, we first generate 200 SE(3) grasp poses with each model and for each object. As
we can observe in Figure 7, the generated grasps are diverse and consider multiple grasping points. For our model, we get
the initial SE(3) elements by sampling from a normal distribution on Lie groups

H0 = Expmap(ϵ) , ϵ ∼N(0, σI)
(18)

with σ = σK, the biggest noise level during the training. Then, we evaluate the grasps quality in Nvidia Isaac Gym. We
reset the Franka’s end effector in the chosen grasp pose. We smoothly close the fingers until a tight grip is achieved and lift
the gripper to a certain height. We consider the grasp to be successful if, after the lift, the mug remains close to the gripper.
We also evaluate the divergence of the generated samples distribution w.r.t. data distribution. This divergence informs about
how well the learned distribution matches the data distribution, covering all modes. We measure this divergence with the
EMD [42]. We first sample N = 1000 grasp poses from the data distribution and from the learned model, respectively, and
build a table with the relative distance between all the SE(3) grasp poses as

dSO(3)+R3(Hi, Hj) = ∥ti −tj∥+


LogMap(R−1
i Rj)


,
(19)

Fig. 8: Visualization of evaluation procedure for robot grasp pose generation. Note that the pictures illustrate the evaluation of the 5 lowest cost particles
using our proposed joint optimization with SE(3)-DiF. Importantly, each particle is evaluated in its own environment (environment is identified by colored
arm & mug) and there are no collisions between different environments. Left to right: 1) All environments start with the same initial mug & robot pose.
2) Setting the arms to the optimized robot grasp pose. 3 & 4) Attempting to lift the mugs. In this case, all the particles result in successes.

TABLE I: Comparing different approaches for robot grasp pose generation with ns = 100 initial samples.

Objects upright
Objects flipped
Method
sΩ
s1
sΩ
s1
joint opt (classifier)
0.03
0.77
0.03
0.68
sample (SE(3)-DiF) + opt (nsm = 1)
0.11
0.79
0.03
0.57
sample (SE(3)-DiF) + opt (nsm = 10)
0.46
0.80
0.12
0.76
Ours
0.62
0.88
0.49
0.88

the grasp poses are too far from the data distribution, the classifier lacks informative gradients that would allow us to move
the grasp poses to the high-probability regions (See Figure 4).

B. Evaluation of SE(3)-DiffusionFields for robot grasp pose generation

This section complements the findings presented in Section IV-B. The results for the robot grasp pose generation have
also been obtained in Nvidia Isaac Gym, using the procedure as shown in Figure 8.
For obtaining the results, the optimizations not only consider the grasp pose in SE(3), but also the robot joint configuration.
In particular, for the two end-end approaches, i.e., classifier & joint opt, we aim to minimize the following objective function

J (q) = Eθ(ϕee(q)) + ctable coll.(q)
(20)

with the learned grasp costs Eθ and the table collision cost. The table collision avoidance cost is computed for all the
collision spheres in the robot xc = (xc, yc, zc) ∈R3. Given the radius for a particular collision body is rc ∈R

K
X

c=0
ReLU(−(zc −ztable −rc)).
(21)

ctable coll.(q) =

For the separate optimization procedure, we first only optimize for the grasp poses Hgrasp pose through

J (Hgrasp pose) = Eθ(Hgrasp pose),
(22)

thereby not taking into account the current pose of the object, nor any other environmental constraint and thus have to
subsequently optimize the following cost function in joint space (for fixed Hgrasp pose)

J (q) = cdes grasp dist(ϕee(q), Hgrasp pose) + ctable coll.(q)
(23)

with current grasping pose H(q) and the cost on the distance to the previously optimized grasp pose

cdes grasp dist(H(q), Hgrasp pose) = 10 ∥tq −tgrasp pose∥+


LogMap(R−1
q Rgrasp pose)


.
(24)

Weighting of cost terms

Minimize distance
Grasp cost
Table collision
to desired grasp
Method
Phase
Eθ(Hgrasp pose)
Eθ(ϕee(q))
ctable coll.(q)
cdes grasp dist(ϕee(q), Hgrasp pose)
joint opt (classifier)
-
2
3
-
our joint opt (SE(3)-DiF)
-
2
3
-

sample (SE(3)-DiF)
1) grasp sampling
1
-
-
-
+ opt
2) opt robot pose
-
-
0.5
1.5

TABLE II: This table summarizes the weighting of the individual cost terms that have been used for generating robot grasp poses, as presented in
Section IV-B & Section III-B. The table’s first two rows describe the weighting of the cost terms when running one single joint optimization procedure in
which grasp generation and avoiding table collisions are considered jointly. While for the method in the first row, we use the trained classifier as described
in Section IV-B, all the other approaches use our proposed SE(3)-DiF diffusion model as the cost function for evaluating grasp poses. Moreover, table’s last
two rows detail the weighting of the cost terms for the split, two-stage optimization procedure. Note that the separate optimization thus requires running
two optimizations.

C. Evaluation of SE(3)-DiffusionFields for joint grasp and motion optimization

In the following, we provide an extended presentation of the experiments in Section IV-B. We evaluate the performance
of SE(3)-DiF as cost function in a trajectory optimization problem. We consider three robot tasks in which both the selection
of the grasping pose, and the trajectory planning are required. We explore if we can use SE(3)-DiF as a cost in a single
trajectory optimization problem and jointly optimize both for the trajectory and the grasp pose at the last waypoint. The
objective function

J (τ, k) = Eθ(ϕee(qt=T ), k) +
X

k
ck(τ)
(25)

is composed of both the learned SE(3)-DiF, Eθ and a set of heuristics cost functions that represent different subtasks
(trajectory smoothness, collision avoidance, ...). All trajectories are planned in the configuration space. Then, we frame
the optimization problem as an inverse diffusion process and diffuse a set of initial trajectory samples as presented in
Section III-C. We sample the initial trajectories as straight trajectories in the configuration space towards a randomly
sampled configuration. After diffusing a set of trajectories, we pick the one with the lowest accumulated cost J (τ, 1). We
evaluate this approach in three tasks that require the planning of both the trajectory and the grasping pose: picking an object
with occlusions, picking and reorienting an object and pick and placing on shelves.
1) Picking with occlusions: In the following, we provide an extended presentation of the experiment on picking an object
with occlusions. The experimental evaluation is performed in three different scenarios, with the mug initialized both in
normal pose or upside down. We illustrate the scenarios in Figure 9. We evaluate the success for 100 trajectories with

Fig. 9: Scenarios for Picking with occlusions. The boxes and the table are obstacles and the robot must find a trajectory to grasp the mug. We consider
the mug might be positioned both upright and upside-down.

Fig. 10: Evaluation of the Success for picking with occlusions.

kinematic model, based on Facebook’s kinematics model [66]. We define the collision body of our robot by a set of spheres
similar to [67]. We set the trajectory smoothness cost

T −1
X

t=1
∥qt+1 −qt∥2
(26)

csmooth(τ) =

as the minimization of the relative distance between the neighbour points in the trajectory. This cost can be thought as a
spring making all the point in the trajectory be attracted between each other. The table collision avoidance cost is computed
for all the collision spheres in the robot xct = (xct, yct, zct) ∈R3. Given the radius for a particular collision body is rc ∈R

T
X

K
X

c=0
ReLU(−(zct −ztable −rc))
(27)

ctable coll.(τ) =

t=1

with ztable the height of the table and a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) to bound the cost. Given we have access to the SDF
of the collision obstacles in the environment, we can set the box collision cost as

T
X

K
X

c=0
ReLU(−(SDF(xct) −rc)).
(28)

cbox coll.(τ) =

t=1

In the trajectory optimization problems, we might want to fix the initial configuration to the current robot configuration.
While the easiest approach is not updating q0 during optimization, we can alternatively set a initial configuration fixing
cost

cfix(τ) = ∥q1 −qinit∥
(29)

with qinit the initial configuration of the robot. Finally, we set also a pregrasping cost. It is common to approximate to the
grasp in the cartesian space from a grasp a few centimeters over the grasp pose. We set a cost that encourages the optimized
trajectory to approximate in this way

T −1
X

t=T −n
dSO(3)+R3(Hee,t, Hpre,t)
(30)

cpregrasp(τ) =

Description
Cost
Weight
Grasp pose evaluation
Eθ(ϕee(qT ), k)
.5
Trajectory smoothness
csmooth(τ)
10.
Table collision avoidance
ctable coll.(τ)
20.
Box collision cost (other obstacles)
cbox coll.(τ)
20.
Initial configuration fixing cost
cfix(τ)
10.
Pregrasping cost
cpregrasp(τ)
5.

TABLE III: This table summarizes the weighting of the individual cost terms that have been used for generating robot trajectories for the task of picking
a mug under occlusions, as presented in Section IV-B & Section III-C.1.

2) Pick and reorient: In the following we provide an extended presentation of the experiment of picking and reorienting
an object. This experiment aims to explore the performance of SE(3)-DiF in a complex manipulation task as the one of
picking an object and reorient it. We highlight that the whole optimization problem on how to grasp the object, and how
to move it to a target pose is solved in a single optimization loop. The problem is interesting as the optimized trajectory
should not only consider that there is a collision free path to an affordable grasp pose, but also, that the chosen grasp pose
allows us to put the object in a desired target pose. We evaluate the performance of our model 100 times in which the
objects are initialized in an arbitrary random pose and have to be placed in an arbitrary placing pose. We consider a trial to
be successful, if after executing the whole trajectory, the distance between the grasped object and target pose is smaller to
a threshold.
The objective function for this problem maintains multiple costs from the pick on occluded problem (trajectory smoothness,
pregrasp, initial target fix, table collision). Additionally, we consider the grasp SE(3)-DiF at the instant t = T/2 (we aim
to grasp an object in the middle of the trajectory). Finally, we want to impose that the relative position of the object with
respect to the gripper in the grasping moment should be the same as the relative position in the placing. We impose this by
first computing the pose in the object’s frame Ho
ee,t = (Hw
o,t)−1Hw
ee,t, with Hw
ee,t being the end effector pose in the world
frame at the instant t and Hw
o,t the pose of the object in the world frame at the instant t. We define the grasp-place pose
similarity cost as cgrasp place similarity(τ) = dSO(3)+R3(Ho
ee,T/2, Ho
ee,T ), that encourages the end effector pose w.r.t. the object
frame to be the same in both the grasping moment and the placing moment.
Exact weighting of cost terms
In Table IV we present the weighting of the individual cost terms that we have used to obtain the trajectories for these
scenarios of having to pickup a mug and reorienting it to fullfil a desired final pose.

Description
Cost
Weight
Grasp pose evaluation
Eθ(ϕee(qt=T/2), k)
2.
Trajectory smoothness
csmooth(τ)
10.
Table collision avoidance
ctable coll.(τ)
20.
Initial configuration fixing cost
cfix(τ)
1.
Pregrasping cost
cpregrasp(τ)
1.
Grasp-place pose similarity cost
cgrasp place similarity(τ)
10.

TABLE IV: This table summarizes the weighting of the individual cost terms that have been used for generating robot trajectories for the task of picking
a mug in the first half of the trajectory and reorienting it to a desired final pose in the second half of the trajectory, as presented in Section IV-B &
Section III-C.2.

3) Pick and place on shelves: In the following, we provide an extended presentation of the experiment of picking and
placing on shelves. Similarly to the pick and reorient task, this experiment was chosen to evaluate the performance of
SE(3)-DiF solving complex manipulation tasks jointly. This task is of high interest as both the set of affordable grasping
poses and placing poses is very small due to the possible collisions with the shelves and therefore, jointly optimizing the
trajectory and the grasp pose might be highly beneficial. The task is visualized in Figure 1. We evaluate the task similarly
to the pick and reorient task. We generate 100 trajectories, execute them, and measure how close the grasped object is to
the target pose in the last instant.
We consider the same objective function as for the pick and reorient task, but we also add a collision-avoidance cost to
take the shelves collisions into account.
Exact weighting of cost terms
In Table V we present the weighting of the individual cost terms that we have used to obtain the trajectories for these
scenarios of picking a mug located inside a shelf and placing it in another desired final pose.

D. Pointcloud based SE(3)-DiffusionFields

TABLE V: This table summarizes the weighting of the individual cost terms that have been used for generating robot trajectories for the task of picking
and placing a mug inside a shelf as presented in Section IV-B & Section III-C.3.

Fig. 11: An illustration of the PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF architecture for learning 6D grasp pose distributions. The architecture is similar to the autodecoder-based
one (Fig. 3) with a few modifications. We substitute the shape code embeddings and the object’s pose transformation for a single pointcloud encoder Eθ
that transforms an input pointcloud P into a latent code z. We model Eθ with a Vector Neuron (VN)-PointNetI , that encodes SO(3) equivariant features.
We train the model to jointly match the different object’s SDF values (sdf) and to minimize the denoising loss. We jointly learn the parameters for the
pointcloud encoder Eθ, the features encoder Fθ and, the decoder Dθ.

object shape and pose are known. We assume that we can rely on state-of-the-art object pose detection and segmentation
to estimate the object class and pose [68]. We apply an autodecoder approach [35] and learn a set of latent codes z that
represent the different shapes. Then, in practice, given we know the exact object, we can retrieve the shape code z given
we know the index of the object.
For completeness, in this experimental section, we evaluate the performance of SE(3)-DiF with a Pointcloud encoder
instead of an autodecoder. We modify the architecture in Figure 3 and add a pointcloud encoder Eθ. We refer to this model
as PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF. We present the modified architecture in Figure 11. We model the pointcloud encoder Eθ with a VN-
PointNet [69]. The network outputs SO(3)-equivariant features that allow us to easily encode the orientation of the different
objects. A similar network has been previously applied in [70] to learn the features of a graspable object.
We aim to evaluate the performance difference between the autodecoder based SE(3)-DiF and the pointcloud encoder
based SE(3)-DiF models. We consider three scenarios for the autodecoder-based model: (i) Both object shape and pose are
known, (ii) Only the shape is known and (iii) We don’t know neither the shape nor the pose of the object. The case (i),
where both pose and shape of the object are known, is presented in Sec. IV-A. For the cases when either the object pose or
both pose and shape code are unknown, we rely on pointclouds for inferring them. We follow a similar inference approach
to the one proposed in [35] and extended it to infer also the pose of the object Hw
o . Given a pointcloud P : {xn}N
n=0 and
the learned SDF function F sdf
θ
, we infer the Hw
o by

N
X

1
N

n=0
F sdf
θ
(Hw
o xn, z)
(31)

Hw∗
o
= arg min
Hw
o

given z the shape code of a known object. Intuitively, (31) searches for the object pose Hw
o that makes the pointcloud pose
to match the one of the learned SDF function. We can think of this optimization problem as an Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
algorithm [71], but instead of matching two sets of points, we match a set of points with the SDF function. For the case
when neither pose nor shape of the object is known, we infer both z and Hw
o

N
X

1
N

n=0
F sdf
θ
(Hw
o xn, z) + ∥z∥2 ,
(32)

Hw∗
o , z∗= arg min
Hw
o ,z

Fig. 12: Evaluation of the Success for picking with occlusions. PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF refers to the model with a pointcloud encoder, SE(3)-DiF (Rot) to the
model in which the pose is infer from the pointcloud, SE(3)-DiF the model in which both the pose and shape are known, SE(3)-DiF (Z+Rot) the model
in which both the object pose and shape codes are inferred from the pointcloud, and 6DoF-Graspnet [6].

Figure 12. In Figure 12, we name SE(3)-DiF the case where both object shape and pose are known, SE(3)-DiF (Rot) the
case where the object’s shape is known, and the pose is inferred by pointclouds with (31), SE(3)-DiF (Z+Rot) the case
in which both object pose and shape are inferred with (32) and PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF the Pointcloud conditioned model. We
observe a high performance in terms of both success rate and EMD for SE(3)-DiF, SE(3)-DiF (Rot) and for the PoiNt-
SE(3)-DiF. We also observe that the best success rate and EMD was achieved by SE(3)-DiF, followed by SE(3)-DiF (Rot)
and PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF. We hypothesize that this might be related to the unknown variables on each case. PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF
needs to infer both the shape and the pose, while SE(3)-DiF assumes this to be known. We observe that SE(3)-DiF (Z+Rot)
was not able to achieve a high success rate. We were not able to properly infer both the shape code and the pose jointly by
(32). Therefore, if both the shape and the pose are unknown, we propose using PoiNt-SE(3)-DiF, while if the shape and the
pose are known, we rather propose using the autodecoder approach. We observe, that all diffusion-based methods, except
the SE(3)-DiF (Z+Rot) outperformed 6DoF-GraspNet in terms of both success rate and Earth Mover Distance. While the
success rate of 6DoF-GraspNet is is close to the one of the diffusion models, the EMD decays alot. This evaluation infers
that the samples obtained by 6DoF-GraspNet are less diverse and the generation collapses to some modes in the dataset
without covering it all.