Faithful Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Qing Lyu ∗
Shreya Havaldar∗
Adam Stein∗
Li Zhang
Delip Rao
Eric Wong
Marianna Apidianaki
Chris Callison-Burch
University of Pennsylvania
{lyuqing, shreyah, steinad, zharry, exwong,
marapi,

Input
CoT output

Abstract

Q: John plans to sell all his
toys and use the money to
buy video games. He has 13
lego sets and he sells them
for $15 each. He ends up
buying 8 videogames for $20
each and has $5 left. How
many lego sets does he still
have?

A: He started with 13 lego sets. He sold
them for $15 each. So he must have
gotten 13 * $15 = $195 from selling
them. He used this money to buy 8
video games for $20 each. This means
he spent 8 * $20 = $160 on the video
games. He had $5 left, so in total he
must have had $195 + $5 = $200. The
answer is 0.

While Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting
boosts Language Models’ (LM) performance
on a gamut of complex reasoning tasks, the
generated reasoning chain does not necessar-
ily reflect how the model arrives at the answer
(aka. faithfulness). We propose Faithful CoT,
a reasoning framework involving two stages:
Translation (Natural Language query →sym-
bolic reasoning chain) and Problem Solving
(reasoning chain →answer), using an LM and
a deterministic solver respectively. This guaran-
tees that the reasoning chain provides a faithful
explanation of the final answer. Aside from in-
terpretability, Faithful CoT also improves em-
pirical performance: it outperforms standard
CoT on 9 of 10 benchmarks from 4 diverse do-
mains, with a relative accuracy gain of 6.3% on
Math Word Problems (MWP), 3.4% on Plan-
ning, 5.5% on Multi-hop Question Answering
(QA), and 21.4% on Relational Inference. Fur-
thermore, with GPT-4 and Codex, it sets the
new state-of-the-art few-shot performance on
7 datasets (with 95.0+ accuracy on 6 of them),
showing a strong synergy between faithfulness
and accuracy.1

arXiv:2301.13379v3 [cs.CL] 20 Sep 2023

Figure 1: An example of unfaithful output from CoT
prompting (Wei et al., 2022) on GSM8K. The answer
(green) does not follow from the reasoning chain (blue).

ing chains reflect the underlying reasoning pro-
cess behind the model’s prediction, namely, how
faithful they are as explanations (Jacovi and Gold-
berg, 2020, i.a.). In standard CoT, faithfulness is
not guaranteed and even systematically violated
(Turpin et al., 2023), as the final answer does not
necessarily follow from the generated reasoning
chain. In other words, CoT can “lie” about the
model’s true reasoning process. Figure 1 exempli-
fies such an unfaithful CoT generation from Wei
et al. (2022) on GSM8K: the answer “0” is not even
mentioned in the reasoning chain. This, along with
more examples in Appendix B.1, illustrates that
standard CoT does not provide interpretability of
how the model predicts the answer.
The lack of faithfulness in CoT can be danger-
ous in high-stake applications because it may mis-
lead people into believing that the model is self-
interpretable, while there is no actual causal rela-
tionship between the reasoning chain and the an-
swer. Even worse, when an unfaithful explanation
looks plausible (i.e., convincing to humans) (Jacovi
and Goldberg, 2020), this makes it easier for peo-
ple (e.g., legal practitioners) to over-trust the model
(e.g., a recidivism predictor) even if it has implicit
biases (e.g., against racial minorities) (Pruthi et al.,
2020; Slack et al., 2020).
To address this concern, we propose Faithful
CoT, a reasoning framework where the answer is
the result of deterministically executing the rea-
soning chain. Specifically, we break down a com-

1
Introduction

Complex reasoning tasks, such as commonsense
reasoning and math reasoning, have long been the
Achilles heel of LMs (Bengio, 2019), until a recent
line of work on Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning
(Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022, i.a.) brought
striking performance gains. CoT prompts an LM to
generate a reasoning chain along with the answer,
given only a few in-context exemplars.
Besides performance improvement, CoT is also
claimed to “provide an interpretable window into
the behavior of the model” (Wei et al., 2022). How-
ever, it is unclear how accurately these reason-

∗Equal contribution.
1Our code, data, and prompts are available at
github.com/veronica320/Faithful-COT.

performance on 7 datasets, with 95.0+ accuracy
on 6 of them. This suggests that interpretability
does not have to come at the cost of performance;
instead, there exists a strong synergy in between.
Our key contributions are as follows:
(a) We propose Faithful CoT, a framework that
decomposes reasoning into Translation and Prob-
lem Solving. The reasoning chain interleaves user-
understandable natural language comments and ex-
ecutable symbolic language programs, thus pro-
viding faithful interpretability of how the model
arrives at the answer.
(b) Our approach is generalizable to multiple do-
mains beyond arithmetic reasoning and simple sym-
bolic reasoning, thanks to its flexible integration
with any choice of SL and external solver. We set
the new SOTA performance on 7 out of the 10 rea-
soning datasets, showing a strong synergy between
faithfulness and accuracy.
(c) We provide an extensive analysis of the
strengths and weaknesses of our method, show-
ing its generalizability across LMs, robustness to
the choice of exemplars and prompt phrasing, the
pivotal role of the solver, the plausibility of gen-
erated reasoning chains, as well as frequent error
patterns where it still struggles.

Query (NL)

Translation

Language Model

Reasoning Chain

(NL + SL)

Problem Solving

Deterministic Solver

Answer

Figure 2: An overview of our Faithful CoT framework,
consisting of Translation, where an LM translates a
query (in NL/Natural Language) into a reasoning chain
(which interleaves NL and SL/Symbolic Language), and
Problem Solving, where an external solver executes the
reasoning chain to derive the answer.

plex reasoning task into two stages: Translation
and Problem Solving (Figure 2). During Trans-
lation, an LM translates a query into a reasoning
chain, which interleaves NL and Symbolic Lan-
guage (SL). The NL component decomposes the
original query into multiple simpler, interdepen-
dent subproblems. Then, each subproblem is tack-
led in a task-dependent SL, such as Python, Dat-
alog, or Planning Domain Definition Language
(PDDL). In the Problem Solving stage, the reason-
ing chain is executed by a deterministic solver, e.g.,
a Python/Datalog interpreter, or a PDDL planner,
to derive the answer.
Our reasoning chain (outcome of Translation) is
guaranteed to provide a faithful explanation of how
the final answer is produced (outcome of Problem
Solving), therefore making our method more inter-
pretable than standard CoT methods.2 While in-
terpretability is not the same as correctness (i.e.
our method can reveal the reasoning process be-
hind both correct and wrong answers), we find that
it does empirically improve correctness: when
evaluated on 10 reasoning datasets from 4 diverse
domains (MWP, Planning, Multi-hop QA, and Re-
lational Inference), Faithful CoT brings consistent
performance gains over three existing baselines,
across different LMs and decoding strategies. With
Codex, our approach outperforms vanilla CoT on 9
of the 10 datasets, with a relative accuracy gain of
6.3% on MWP, 3.4% on Planning, 5.5% on Multi-
hop QA, and 21.4% on Relational Inference. With
GPT-4, our method sets the new SOTA few-shot

2
Related Work

Faithfulness.
In interpretability, faithfulness
(also called fidelity or reliability) means that an ex-
planation should “accurately represent the reason-
ing process behind the model’s prediction”, which
is a fundamental requirement of an explanation
(Harrington et al., 1985; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Gilpin
et al., 2018; Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020).3 It should
be contrasted with plausibility (a.k.a. persuasive-
ness or understandability), which refers to “how
convincing an explanation is to humans” (Herman,
2019; Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020). In the context
of CoT prompting, a faithful reasoning chain needs
to accurately reflect how the model arrives at the
final answer, whereas a plausible reasoning chain is
one that looks reasonable and coherent to humans.
Standard CoT (Wei et al., 2022) generates the rea-

3Note that this differs from the notion of faithfulness in
the Natural Language Generation (NLG) literature, primarily
in what constitutes the ground truth. In interpretability, we
talk about the faithfulness of an explanation w.r.t. the model’s
underlying reasoning mechanism – the ground truth is usu-
ally unknown. In NLG, we talk about the faithfulness of the
generated text (e.g., a translated sentence, or a summary) w.r.t.
some explicit source (e.g., the source sentence, or the full
document) – the ground truth is transparent.

2Note that we do not claim that the process of generat-
ing the reasoning chain itself, i.e., the Translation stage, is
interpretable. See more discussion in Limitations.

soning chain in pure NL, which may often look
plausible; nevertheless, the final answer does not
need to causally follow from the reasoning chain,
thus not guaranteeing faithfulness.
Chain-of-Thought-style prompting.
In CoT-
style prompting, given a complex question Q, an
LM is prompted to generate a reasoning chain C
along with the final answer A. Specifically, the
prompt consists of a few examples of (Q, C, A)
triples, called in-context exemplars. This allows
pre-trained LMs (e.g., GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020))
to solve unseen questions with much higher accu-
racy than standard prompting, where the exemplars
do not contain the reasoning chain C.
We create a taxonomy of existing CoT-style
prompting methods into three types: all-at-once,
ensemble-based, and modularized. All-at-once
prompting means that the LM produces C and A
as one continuous string, without any dependencies
or constraints in between. Scratchpad (Nye et al.,
2021), standard CoT (Wei et al., 2022), and “Let’s
think step by step” (Kojima et al., 2022), are all
examples of this kind. Ensemble-based prompting
is designed to overcome the local optimality issue
of the one-shot generation in previous methods by
sampling multiple (C, A) pairs and choosing the
best answer via strategies like majority voting. Ex-
amples include Self-Consistent CoT (Wang et al.,
2022), Minerva (Lewkowycz et al., 2022), and DI-
VERSE (Li et al., 2022), which differ mainly in the
voting granularity and the underlying LM. Modu-
larized methods break down Q into subproblems
and then conquer them individually (Jung et al.,
2022; Qian et al., 2022, i.a.). In particular, Least-
to-Most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022) has a similar
question decomposition process to ours, but there
is still no faithfulness guarantee since the reasoning
chain is entirely in NL.
Concurrent with our work, Chen et al. (2022)
and Gao et al. (2022) both generate Python pro-
grams (i.e., SL-only reasoning chains) to derive the
answer. We want to highlight the following quali-
tative differences:4 (a) In terms of motivation, our
approach is interpretability-driven, whereas theirs
are performance-driven. (b) Our reasoning chain
involves a structured decomposition of the prob-
lem in NL, allowing users without a programming
background to better understand and potentially in-
teract with the system. (c) They only use Python as
the SL and only tackle math and simple symbolic

reasoning tasks, whereas we demonstrate the gen-
eralizability of our approach to multiple symbolic
languages and various other domains. In particu-
lar, we innovatively recast a diverse set of realis-
tic tasks (Planning, Multi-hop QA, and Relational
Inference) into a symbolic representation, which
allows us to tackle them with a single framework.
(d) We perform a more comprehensive analysis
compared to previous work, especially a human
evaluation of the reasoning chain correctness.

3
Method

Our method, Faithful CoT, is a 2-stage pipeline,
as seen in Figure 2. Like previous CoT-style work,
our prompt consists of (Q, C, A) triples. Notable
differences lie in our unique interleaving of NL
(natural language) and SL (symbolic language) in
C, as well as the way we derive the final answer A.
In the Translation stage, given a complex query
Q in NL, we prompt an LM to translate it into a rea-
soning chain C, which interleaves NL comments
and SL programs. The NL component decomposes
the original query into multiple simpler, interdepen-
dent subproblems. Then, each subproblem is tack-
led in a task-dependent SL, such as Python, Data-
log, or PDDL. In the Problem Solving stage, we
call a deterministic external solver, e.g., a Python
interpreter, a Datalog executor, or PDDL planner,
depending on the task, to obtain the answer A from
the reasoning chain C. As shown in Figure 3, we
define CNL to be the NL component (black) and
CSL to be the SL component (blue) in C. Though
we separate the two components notationally, they
are interleaved in the generation. Using this ap-
proach, C is guaranteed to be a faithful model ex-
planation, since our final A is the result of determin-
istically executing CSL. Moreover, CNL allows the
user to better understand the reasoning process.5

We apply this method to 4 types of complex rea-
soning tasks: MWP, Multi-hop QA, Planning, and
Relational Inference. Next, we will illustrate how
our method works for each of them, with examples
from Figure 3.

3.1
Math Word Problems (MWP)

Given a grade-school math question Q written in
NL (“If there are 3 cars in the parking lot and 2
more cars arrive, how many cars are in the park-
ing lot?”, shown in green in Figure 3), we want to

5While no constraints are enforced between CNL and CSL
in our main experiments, we analyze this in Section C.4.

4Also see Appendix B.3 for an empirical comparison.

Query
Reasoning Chain
Answer

# 1. How many cars are there in the beginning? (independent, support: ["there
are 3 cars in the parking lot"])
n_cars_begin = 3
# 2. How many cars arrive? (independent, support: ["2 more cars arrive"])
n_cars_arrive = 2
# 3. Final answer: How many cars are in the parking lot? (depends on 1, 2)
n_cars_total = n_cars_begin + n_cars_arrive

If there are 3 cars in the
parking lot and 2 more
cars arrive, how many
cars are in the parking lot?

5

// 1. What is the density of an apple?
// The density of an apple is about 0.75 g/cm^3.
// 2. What is the density of water?
// Water has a density of 1 g/cm^3.
// Then, we represent these answers in Datalog:
// 1. The density of an apple is about 0.75 g/cm^3.
.decl Has_density(Object:symbol, Density:float)
Has_density("apple", 0.75).
// 2. Water has a density of 1 g/cm^3.
Has_density("water", 1).
// Now, we derive the final answer: Would an apple sink in water?
// The answer is Yes only if an apple is more dense than water.
.decl Answer()
Answer() :- Has_density("apple", density1), Has_density("water",
density2), density1 > density2.
.output Answer

Would an apple sink in
water?

No

Translator

Deterministic

(LM)

Solver

# 1. How is [Vincent] related to [Dorothy]? (independent, support: "
[Dorothy]'s son [Vincent] showed up shortly after.")
relation(Vincent, Dorothy) = son
# 2. How is [Dorothy] related to [Gabrielle]? (independent, support: "
[Gabrielle] drove her daughter [Dorothy] to the hospital.")
relation(Dorothy, Gabrielle) = daughter
# 3. Final answer: How is [Vincent] related to [Gabrielle]? (depends on 1, 2)
relation(Vincent, Gabrielle) = relation(Vincent, Dorothy) @
relation(Dorothy, Gabrielle)

[Gabrielle] drove her
daughter [Dorothy] to the
hospital. [Dorothy]'s son
[Vincent] showed up shortly
after. How is [Vincent]
related to [Gabrielle]?

grandson

1. find(coke)
2. pick(coke)
3. find(trash)
4. put(coke)
5. find(sponge)
6. pick(sponge)
7. find(user)
8. put(sponge)

Goal in PDDL:
(:goal
; I need to do both things
(and
; first throw away the coke
(at coke trash)
; then bring the user a sponge as a cleaning tool
(at sponge user)
)
)

I spilled my coke on the
table, could you throw it
away and bring something
to clean with?

Figure 3: Examples from each task (Math Word Problems, Multi-hop QA, Relational Inference, and Planning)
showing our 2-stage Translation and Problem Solving pipeline.

obtain A as a real-valued number (5). In the Trans-
lation stage, we prompt the LM to take in Q and
generate a reasoning chain C, which interleaves
CNL and CSL. Specifically, the CNL component
consists of three types of information:
(a) Subquestions: Q is broken down into multi-
ple smaller-scale subquestions, e.g., “1. how many
cars are there in the beginning?”, “2. how many
cars arrive?”, and “3. how many cars are in the
parking lot?”.
(b) Dependency Graph: Each subquestion can
either be answered directly via context (subques-
tions 1 and 2 are “independent”) or rely on answers
to previous subquestions (subquestion 3 “depends
on 1 and 2”).
(c) Rationales: Each subquestion is accompa-
nied with rationale(s) to support the answer (the
“support” field). The rationales can be either a sub-
set of the original context (“2 more cars arrive”)
or any external knowledge (“there are 7 days in a
week”) relevant to the subquestion.
Each subquestion and its corresponding depen-
dencies and rationales inform the subsequent gen-
eration of CSL. In our example in Figure 3, CSL
consists of Python code generated to answer each
subquestion in CNL. During the Problem Solving
stage, we execute CSL using our solver, a Python
interpreter, to derive A (5 cars in the end).

3.2
Multi-hop QA

Given a complex question Q that involves multi-
ple steps of reasoning (e.g., “Would a pear sink
in water?”, shown in red in Figure 3), we want to
obtain the answer A as a Boolean value or string
value variable. Similar to our MWP task formula-
tion, C interleaves CNL (NL comments), and CSL
(symbolic program). Depending on the nature of
the task, the format of the reasoning chain C is
slightly different: for some datasets, the LM first
generates all subquestions and their answers in NL,
and then represents these answers as SL to derive
A (see Figure 3); for others, the LM interleaves the
NL subquestions and the SL program, similar to
the case of MWP (see Table 14 and Table 15 for
examples). In terms of SL, we use both Python
and Datalog, also depending on the dataset. As
Multi-hop QA problems involve multi-step reason-
ing to solve, CSL often utilizes Boolean algebra
and string comparisons (in Python) along with re-
lation definitions and logic programming (in Data-
log). We use their corresponding interpreter as our
deterministic solver to execute CSL and obtain A.

In the example from Figure 3, the LM first
generates the subquestions, “1. What is the den-
sity of a pear?”
and “2.
What is the den-
sity of water?”, which are individually answered

in NL. The answers (“Water has a density of
1g/cm3”) are converted to Datalog statements
(Has_density(“water”,
1)), which are then
combined to formalize the truth condition of the
final answer. Finally, we execute the Datalog pro-
gram to determine that a pear would not sink in
water.

son. In the Problem Solving stage, our solver is
a simple relational inference engine that relies on
a set of transitivity rules provided by Zhang et al.
(2022) among possible family relationships, e.g.,
(the son of one’s daugh-
ter is one’s grandson). Our solver recursively ap-
plies these rules on CSL to derive A, and determine
that Vincent is Gabrielle’s grandson.

3.3
Planning

4
Experimental setup

In a user-robot interaction scenario, given a house-
hold task query Q from a user, we want to come
up with a plan of actions A that the robot should
take in order to accomplish the task. For example,
in Figure 3, given user query “I spilled my coke
on the table, could you throw it away and bring
something to clean with?”, a possible plan can be
“find(coke), pick(coke), find(trash), put(coke) ...”.
In the Translation stage, an LM translates Q into C,
consisting of CNL (which breaks down Q into sub-
tasks) and CSL (which represents the subtasks as a
symbolic goal in PDDL6 — a language to define
and solve classical planning problems). Figure 3
shows this translation, with CSL in blue and CNL
in black. Finally, we call a PDDL Planner as the de-
terministic solver to obtain A, a plan to accomplish
the goal CSL under the predefined scenario.

4.1
Datasets

Here, we summarize the evaluation datasets used
for each domain. We select the same number (6 to
10, depending on the task) of exemplars as in Wei
et al. (2022) to form our few-shot prompt, which
can be found in our repository. Unless otherwise
stated, we use the official splits: training set for ex-
emplar selection, validation set for prompt tuning,
and test set for evaluation.7

Math Word Problems (MWP).
We follow
Wei et al. (2022) and consider the same five
MWP benchmarks: GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021),
SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021), MultiArith (Roy and
Roth, 2015), ASDiv (Miao et al., 2020), and AQuA
(Ling et al., 2017). For all datasets, the input ques-
tion is phrased in NL. The answer is a string-valued
mathematical expression for AQuA, and one or
more integer(s) for all other datasets. We use the
same 8-shot prompt for all datasets except AQuA.
Multi-hop QA.
We consider the three datasets:
StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021), a dataset of open-
domain questions that require an implicit multi-
step strategy to answer, e.g., “Did Aristotle use a
laptop?” involves answering “1. When did Aris-
totle live?”, “2. When was the laptop invented?”,
and “3. Is #2 before #1?”; Date Understanding
from BIG-bench (BIG-Bench collaboration, 2021),
which asks the model to infer a date from a con-
text, by performing computation on relative peri-
ods of time; and finally, Sports Understanding
from BIG-bench, which asks the model to decide
whether an artificially constructed statement related
to sports is plausible or implausible. Since the latter
two datasets do not have a training set, we follow
Wei et al. (2022) and select 10 examples from the
test set to form the prompt and use the rest for
evaluation.
Planning.
We use the SayCan dataset (Ahn et al.,
2022), which assumes a scenario of a robot operat-

3.4
Relational Inference

Given a relational inference problem Q written in
NL, we want to obtain A as a string-valued vari-
able. For example, the CLUTRR (Sinha et al.,
2019) dataset involves inferring the family relation-
ship (e.g., “grandson”) between two people from
a short story (e.g., “[Gabrielle] drove her daughter
[Dorothy] to the hospital. [Dorothy]’s son [Vin-
cent] showed up shortly after. How is [Vincent] re-
lated to [Gabrielle]?”, shown in yellow in Figure 3).
During the Translation stage, we prompt the LM to
generate C, consisting of CNL and CSL. Similar
to previous tasks, CNL breaks down Q into sub-
questions (“How is [Vincent] related to [Dorothy]”
and “How is [Dorothy] related to [Gabrielle]”),
as well as provide input extracts as rationales to
support the answer (“[Dorothy]’s son [Vincent]
showed up shortly after”, etc.). Each subquestion
in CNL is answered in CSL via a relational ex-
pression representing the relation between the men-
tioned entities, for example, relation(Vincent,
Dorothy)=son denotes that Vincent is Dorothy’s

6
Domain_Definition_Language.
A goal is a special
construct in PDDL.

7See Appendix E for dataset statistics, examples, data
cleaning method, splits, prompt construction strategy, etc.

Query

Royce takes 40 minutes more than double Rob to shingle a house. If Rob takes 2 hours, how many minutes does Royce take?

Standard Prompting

Least-to-Most Prompting

Faithful CoT Reasoning (ours)

(Zhou et al., 2023)

Model Output

Model Output

Model Output

The answer is 4 hours and 20 minutes.

# To answer this question, write a Python program to answer the
following subquestions:
# 1. How many minutes does Rob take to shingle a house?
(independent, support: ["If Rob takes 2 hours"])
minutes_rob = 2 * 60
# 2. How many minutes does Royce take to shingle a house?
(depends on 1, support: ["Royce takes 40 minutes more than
double Rob"])
minutes_royce = minutes_rob * 2 + 40
# 3. Final Answer: How many minutes does Royce take?
(depends on 2, support: [])
answer = minutes_royce

To answer the question, we need to know:

Q1. How many minutes does Rob take?
Rob takes 2 hours.
Q2. How many minutes does Royce take?
Royce takes 40 minutes more than double
Rob.
Final Answer: How many minutes does
Royce take?
Royce takes 2*2 + 40 = 84 minutes.

Chain of Thought (CoT) Prompting

(Wei et al., 2022)

Model Output

Royce takes 40 minutes more than
double Rob. That means Royce takes 2 *
2 + 40 = 80 + 40 = 120 minutes.
The answer is 120.

The answer is 84.

Python Interpreter
>>> 280
>>>

Figure 4: A sample output for a math question from three baselines and Faithful CoT (our method). The ground-truth
answer is 280, and only our method correctly computes the answer.

4.3
Baselines

ing in a kitchen, helping the user with household
tasks, e.g., “bring a coke to the table”. There are
a number of locations and objects that the robot
can interact with. The robot can only perform a
fixed set of actions, including find, pick, and put.
The task is to map a user query in NL to a plan of
predefined actions. Following Wei et al. (2022), we
manually write 7 exemplars, since no training set
is provided.

We compare our method to three other few-shot
prompting baselines, shown in Figure 4: standard
prompting, popularized by Brown et al. (2020),
with demonstrations of only the question and the
answer; CoT (Wei et al., 2022), which addition-
ally includes an NL reasoning chain; and Least-
to-Most (LtM) (Zhou et al., 2022), which decom-
poses the question in NL but does not involve SL.
All prompting methods are compared under two
decoding strategies: greedy decoding, where the
LM samples the most probable next token from
the vocabulary (i.e., temperature = 0.0); and self-
consistency decoding (Wang et al., 2022), where
the LM generates multiple reasoning chains and
chooses the final chain based on majority voting on
the evaluated answer (we use a temperature of 0.4
and 40 generations for all datasets).8 We reproduce
the baseline results ourselves in cases when they
are not reported on certain tasks or when we clean
the test set.

Relational inference.
We use the CLUTRR
(Sinha et al., 2019) benchmark described in Sec-
tion 3.4. The dataset has multiple splits based on
the number of intermediate steps K required to
reach the answer. We construct the prompt using
8 exemplars with K ∈{2, 3}, and test the models
on the remaining examples with K up to 10.

4.2
Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate the model performance with final an-
swer accuracy as the main metric. Following previ-
ous work (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2022), for all MWP datasets (except AQuA)
where the answer contains integer(s), a correct an-
swer is defined as the exact match between the
prediction and the ground truth both converted to
the nearest integer; for StrategyQA and Sports Un-
derstanding where the answer is a Boolean value, it
is defined as the exact match between the prediction
and the ground truth both evaluated as a Boolean
variable; for SayCan, the generated plan is consid-
ered correct if it is among the ground truth plans;
for all other datasets, we rely on the exact match
between the prediction string and the ground truth
string. Additionally, we evaluate the human-rated
plausibility of the reasoning chain in Appendix D.

4.4
LMs

We use OpenAI Codex (Chen et al., 2021)
(code-davinci-002) in Section 5 and experi-
ment with four other code-generation LMs in Ap-
pendix C.3.

5
Results

Our results on all datasets are shown in Table 1.
With code-davinci-002 as the Translator, Faith-
ful CoT outperforms all baselines across the vast

8Note that we do not report the performance of standard
prompting with self-consistency decoding, since when the
number of sampled outputs is large enough, this converges to
standard prompting with greedy decoding (Wang et al., 2022).

Math Word Problems
Planning
Multi-hop QA
Relation
Method
GSM8K
SVAMP
MultiArith
ASDiv
AQuA
SayCan
StrategyQA
Date
Sport
CLUTRR
Greedy Decoding
Standard
19.6
69.5
43.8
72.1
31.5
82.5
63.9
51.3
71.9
42.0
CoT
63.3
77.3
96.5
80.0
42.1
86.4
72.5
59.9
98.6
48.5
LtM
38.3
80.3
74.0
76.5
40.6
77.7
72.2
76.6
99.5
47.2
Faithful CoT (ours)
72.3
83.4
98.8
80.2
47.2
89.3
63.0
81.6
99.1
58.9
Self-Consistency Decoding
CoT
78.0
86.8
100.0
84.2
52.0
89.3
79.8
63.8
98.0
45.7
LtM
38.8
80.5
74.0
76.3
44.9
76.7
71.9
77.2
99.4
50.9
Faithful CoT (ours)
80.0
88.8
99.2
84.4
61.4
94.2
65.2
85.5
99.0
71.9

Table 1: Accuracy of different prompting methods on 10 reasoning datasets from 4 domains. We compare our
method, Faithful CoT, with standard (Brown et al., 2020), CoT (Wei et al., 2022), and Least-to-Most prompting
(Zhou et al., 2022), with code-davinci-002 as the LM. The best results within each decoding strategy are bolded.

it harder for Codex to produce relevant subques-
tions (17%), retrieve knowledge correctly (10%),
and come up with valid reasoning from the knowl-
edge to the answer (10%). Another potential cause
is the nature of the task, as the difficulty for many
StrategyQA questions does not lie in reasoning but
rather in knowledge retrieval, which makes the ad-
vantages of our deterministic solver less obvious.
Still, with further pretraining on Datalog, we be-
lieve that there is room for improvement.
To see how generalizable our method is, we also
experiment with four alternative LMs and observe
consistent gains brought by Faithful CoT over the
baselines, as shown in Appendix C.3. In particular,
with GPT-4, we set the new few-shot SOTA results
on 7 datasets, achieving 95.0+ accuracy in four out
of five MWP and two out of three Multi-hop QA
datasets. Overall, these results suggest that faith-
fulness does empirically improve performance.

majority of datasets and domains under both decod-
ing strategies. With greedy decoding, Faithful CoT
outperforms all baselines on 8 of the 10 datasets,
by a relative improvement of up to 14.2% on MWP,
3.4% on Planning, 6.5% on Date Understanding
from Multi-hop QA, and a surprising 21.4% on Re-
lational Inference. Generally, we see larger gains
on harder datasets. Take MWP as an example: on
simpler datasets where CoT already performs de-
cently (e.g., MultiArith and AsDiv, where most
questions require only 1-2 steps to solve), the gains
are smaller (0.3% to 2.4%); however, we see the
largest gain (14%) on the most difficult GSM8K,
which requires up to 8 steps to solve. With self-
consistency decoding, Faithful CoT still performs
the best on 7 out of the 10 datasets. Compared to
greedy decoding, the relative gain increases on 4
datasets (AQUA: 12.1% →18.1%, SayCan: 3.4%
→5.5%, Date Understanding: 6.5% →10.8%, and
CLUTRR: 21.4% →41.3%), but decreases or re-
mains unchanged for the remaining three MWP
datasets (GSM8K: 9.0% →2.6%, SVAMP: 3.9%
→2.3%, ASDiV 0.2% →0.2%).

6
Analysis

In this section, we perform an extensive analysis of
the strengths and weaknesses of our method, to bet-
ter understand the role of different components, the
robustness to design choices, the plausibility of gen-
erated reasoning chains, as well as frequent error
patterns where it still struggles. Here, we only show
the first two aspects; see the rest in Appendix C. Un-
less otherwise stated, we choose one dataset from
each domain (GSM8K, Date Understanding, Say-
Can, and CLUTRR) and use code-davinci-002
outputs with greedy decoding.

On the other hand, we do not see clear empirical
gains on two multi-hop QA datasets, Sports Under-
standing on StrategyQA. On Sports Understanding,
Faithful CoT and LtM both have near perfect ac-
curacy (99+), suggesting that the dataset is almost
saturated. On StrategyQA, however, the perfor-
mance of our method is still far from the baselines.
To understand why, we specifically compare the
examples where CoT makes a correct prediction
but our method fails. As shown in Figure 11 in
Appendix F, we find that the likely primary cause
is the sparsity of Datalog in the pretraining data
for Codex, as an overwhelming 29% of errors are
syntax-related. Moreover, including Datalog in the
prompt also interferes with NL generation, making

6.1
Ablation Study

Given the strong performance of Faithful CoT, we
now address a natural question: how much does
each part of the prompt contribute to the accu-
racy? We perform an ablation study where we re-

Exemplars
GSM8K
Date
SayCan
CLUTRR
Set 0 (Table 1)
72.3
81.6
89.3
58.9
Set 1
72.6
81.3
91.3
59.0
Set 2
71.1
85.0
85.4
57.2
Set 3
72.3
82.5
88.3
58.0
Set 4
71.2
77.4
88.3
55.5
Set 5
71.5
85.0
89.3
56.0
Mean
71.8
82.1
88.7
57.4
Std
0.6
2.8
1.9
1.5

Full
No rationale
No NL but nudge

No NL
No solver

0
20
40
60
80
100

Accuracy

GSM8K
Date
SayCan CLUTRR

Figure 5: Ablation study results: accuracy when we
remove different parts of the prompt. See Section 6.1
for details.

Table 2: Robustness to the choice of exemplars.

chain (e.g., at redbull trash). However, the
answer in the other three datasets is only a single
number or string, which can only be derived af-
ter executing all the steps in the reasoning chain.
Therefore, the latter type of tasks further necessi-
tates the presence of an external solver.

move different parts of the prompt and see how the
performance changes. In addition to the original
prompt (“Full”), we test four variations, illustrated
with the example from Figure 4:
No rationale. We remove the rationales, i.e., every-
thing in the brackets from the NL comments, e.g.,
“independent, support: [‘There are 15 trees’]”.
No NL but nudge. We remove all NL comments
except the “nudge” line: e.g., “# To answer this
question, we write a Python program to answer the
following subquestions”.
No NL. We remove all NL comments.
No solver. Instead of calling the external solver,
we add “Answer: {answer}” to the end of every
exemplar and let the LM predict the answer itself.
Figure 5 shows the results of all prompt varia-
tions. On GSM8K, Date Understanding, and Say-
Can, NL comments contribute little to the perfor-
mance, and sometimes even slightly hurt it. On
CLUTRR, however, their role is crucial, since the
exclusion of each component (rationale, nudge,
subquestions) results in a clear accuracy drop. In
particular, comparing No NL but nudge and No
NL, the nudge line itself brings a striking improve-
ment by 31.3 points.
The external solver relieves the burden of prob-
lem solving from the LM. Without it, the accuracy
suffers a huge decline on GSM8K, Date Under-
standing, and CLUTRR (-50.8, -22.9, and -19.4
respectively), while on SayCan it improves by 2.9
nonetheless. One potential influencing factor is that
SayCan might be too homogeneous, as it contains a
set of only 3 predefined actions. This can make the
task relatively easy, which allows all model vari-
ants to achieve around 90% accuracy and renders
the solver unnecessary. Another potential reason is
the level of correspondence between the final an-
swer and the reasoning chain for different datasets:
as shown in Figure 3, the answer in SayCan is a
sequence of actions (e.g., find(redbull)), each
directly corresponding to one step in the reasoning

6.2
Robustness to Exemplars

We now answer the next question: how much does
the choice of exemplars matter? To do this, we
annotate 20 examples in total, randomly sample k
(7-10, depending on the dataset) to construct the
prompt, and repeat the process five times. Table 2
shows the performance of all six runs, including
the original (from Table 1). The mean accuracy is
close to the original (-1.5 to +1.2), still above the
baselines by a large margin (7 to 17) on all datasets
except the arguably easiest SayCan, considering
the standard deviation (1.3 to 2.9). This strongly
suggests that the benefits of Faithful CoT are mini-
mally influenced by the choice of exemplars.

6.3
Human Evaluation of Plausibility

Our main experiments use final answer accuracy
as the performance measure, but this does not nec-
essarily correspond to the validity of the reasoning
chain. Technically, a model can sometimes acci-
dentally arrive at the correct answer with an invalid
reasoning chain. We then ask: when the answer is
correct, how often is the reasoning chain truly
correct? In other words, we want to evaluate the
plausibility of the reasoning chains.
We conduct a human evaluation study on Prolific:
given a generated reasoning chain that results in
a correct answer, a crowd-worker selects whether
it is A) completely correct, or, if incorrect, specify
why with B) incorrect NL and/or C) incorrect SL.
Alternatively, they can select D) flawed question
and E) I am confused.9

The results of our study are shown in Figure 6
(see Table 8 in the Appendix for numerical results).

9See Appendix D for more details on the human study.

Overall, Faithful CoT does generate valid reason-
ing chains for the vast majority of the time when
the answer is correct. However, we still see excep-
tions where the model arrives at the right answer
via an incorrect reasoning chain. Though this hap-
pens infrequently, it raises concerns about when
people should trust LMs. To our knowledge, we
are the first to conduct a systematic human study
on the plausibility of CoT-style reasoning chains,
and we hope to see future work further investigate
and improve on the flaws that our study brings to
light.

Relation

Multi-hop QA

Figure 6: Human evaluation results of reasoning chain
plausibility. Each column represents the percent of dif-
ferent answer choices selected by human evaluators in
each domain/dataset.

7
Conclusion

We propose Faithful CoT, a framework that de-
composes complex reasoning into Translation and
Problem Solving. It guarantees that the reasoning
chain is a faithful explanation of how the model
arrives at the answer. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach on 4 types of complex reasoning
problems: Math Word Problems, Multi-hop QA,
Planning, and Relational Inference. Our method
sets new SOTA performance on 7 of the 10 datasets,
while additionally providing a faithful explanation
for the final answer. These results give empiri-
cal evidence that improving model interpretability,
by guaranteeing the faithfulness of an explanation,
does not come at the expense of overall perfor-
mance; in fact, we see a strong synergy in between.
Through a comprehensive analysis of the strengths
and weaknesses of our method, we show its robust-
ness to the choice of exemplars, the pivotal role of
the solver, as well as frequent error patterns where
it still struggles.

For most domains, we see that annotators often
find the reasoning chain fully correct – Sports, Say-
Can, and MWP have a 90%+ correctness rate. To
gain more insight into when the reasoning chain
can be "incorrect", we perform an in-depth analysis
of user annotations for the three worst-performing
datasets – StrategyQA (66.7% correctness), Date
(87.9% correctness), and CLUTRR (88.0% correct-
ness). From our inspection, we find that annotators
mistakenly mark a correct reasoning chain as incor-
rect at different rates based on the task (8.3% of the
time for StrategyQA, 41.7% for Date Understand-
ing, and 100% for CLUTRR). We find annotators
are inaccurate for Date because they incorrectly be-
lieve the generated code misuses a Python library
(relativedelta), or they complain that there is a
better way to answer the question. For CLUTRR,
annotators mark chains as incorrect due to known
ambiguity in the dataset. For example, the grand-
mother of one’s child may not necessarily be their
parent, but also a parent-in-law.
As for the remaining truly incorrect reasoning
chains, we find the LM can sometimes add un-
necessary steps or arrive at the correct answer by
chance. The latter is especially an issue in Strate-
gyQA - given that all questions have a True/False
answer, it is common for an incorrect reasoning
chain to result in a correct answer. For example, the
LM correctly answers the question "Was Karachi a
part of Alexander the Great’s success?" as "True."
However, the reasoning chain contains the flawed
subquestion "Which countries are in Pakistan? Pak-
istan includes Pakistan, Afghanistan, and India."
Though the final answer is correct and faithful to
the LM generation, the reasoning chain contains
wrong knowledge.

Limitations

One crucial limitation of our study is that on March
23rd, 2023, OpenAI discontinued the use of code-
davinci-002. This has rendered part of our results
unreplicable for any teams or researchers who have
not been granted continued access to the model.
This discontinuation was unexpected during our
study. It raises important questions about using
closed-source models for academic research.
Meanwhile, one methodological limitation of
our approach lies in the scope of faithfulness. Cur-
rently, we guarantee that Problem Solving stage
is faithful. However, the Translation stage is still
opaque, meaning it is not self-interpretable how the
LM generates the reasoning chain from the ques-
tion. It is still an under-explored question whether

it is possible to improve the interpretability of the
LM generation process in general, and a few recent
studies have made promising early progress (Yin
and Neubig, 2022; Sarti et al., 2023) that might be
used to improve the faithfulness of the Translation
stage.
Finally, it still needs further exploration of
the role NL comments in the reasoning chain.
From our ablation study, in terms of performance,
whether to include the NL comments in the reason-
ing chain does not make a big difference on many
of the datasets, especially those where the task is
not knowledge-intensive. Nevertheless, speaking
of interpretability, NL comments can make the rea-
soning chain more structured and understandable
to the end user. Further, NL comments can be an
interface that allows users without a programming
background to interact with and debug the model,
which we leave for future work.

lease, Distribution Unlimited. The views and con-
clusions contained herein are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as necessarily rep-
resenting the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of DARPA, IARPA, NSF, or the U.S. Gov-
ernment.
We appreciate the support from OpenAI on in-
creasing the rate limit for the Codex API. We also
thank Jiani Huang, Ziyang Li, Litao Yan, Andrew
Head, Mayur Naik, and Lyle Ungar for their valu-
able feedback.

References

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yev-
gen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol
Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu,
Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang,
Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jes-
month, Nikhil J. Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-
nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey
Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Pe-
ter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek
Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nico-
las Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent
Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu,
Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. 2022. Do As I
Can, Not As I Say: Grounding Language in Robotic
Affordances. ArXiv:2204.01691 [cs].

Ethics Statement

With the recent success of generative large LMs,
they are now being used to solve complex reason-
ing problems. When using the output of an LM for
reasoning, there is a danger that if the reasoning ap-
pears realistic, then the final answer or conclusion
will also be considered reliable. As we highlighted
in Figure 1 and 7, this is often not true, since
an LM may produce a reasoning chain that looks
plausible, but the final answer is still wrong. This
work is a step in the direction of making the use
of LMs more trustworthy by using the LM for just
expressing its reasoning in a symbolic program and
executing the program independently. In this work,
we have ensured the faithfulness of the reasoning
chain w.r.t how the final answer is produced in a
variety of domains, but admittedly the Translation
phase is still opaque. Therefore, our pipeline is still
not entirely interpretable. Furthermore, as we have
stressed in Section 1, faithfulness does not guaran-
tee correctness, so our method can still sometimes
produce erroneous answers, which may pose a risk
for users that rely on it for decision making.

Yoshua Bengio. 2019.
FROM SYSTEM 1 DEEP
LEARNING TO SYSTEM 2 DEEP LEARNING.

BIG-Bench collaboration. 2021. Beyond the Imitation
Game: Measuring and extrapolating the capabilities
of language models.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.

Acknowledgements

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming
Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen
Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sas-
try, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray,
Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz
Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,

This research is based upon work supported in
part by the DARPA KAIROS Program (contract
FA8750-19-2-1004), the DARPA LwLL Program
(contract FA8750-19-2-0201), the IARPA HIATUS
Program (contract 2022-22072200005), and the
NSF (Award 1928631). Approved for Public Re-

Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cum-
mings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Eliza-
beth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen
Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie
Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles
Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welin-
der, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish,
Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Eval-
uating Large Language Models Trained on Code.
ArXiv:2107.03374 [cs].

Consistent Reasoning with Recursive Explanations.
ArXiv:2205.11822 [cs].

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large Lan-
guage Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners.

Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan,
Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ramasesh,
Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo
Gutman-Solo, Yuhuai Wu, Behnam Neyshabur, Guy
Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. 2022. Solving Quanti-
tative Reasoning Problems with Language Models.
ArXiv:2206.14858 [cs].

Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and
William W. Cohen. 2022.
Program of Thoughts
Prompting:
Disentangling
Computation
from
Reasoning
for
Numerical
Reasoning
Tasks.
ArXiv:2211.12588 [cs].

Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen,
Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. On the Ad-
vance of Making Language Models Better Reasoners.
ArXiv:2206.02336 [cs].

Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil
Blunsom. 2017.
Program induction by rationale
generation: Learning to solve and explain alge-
braic word problems. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
158–167. Association for Computational Linguistics.
ArXiv:1705.04146 [cs].

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Prob-
lems. ArXiv:2110.14168 [cs].

Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon,
Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-
ham Neubig. 2022. PAL: Program-aided Language
Models. ArXiv:2211.10435 [cs].

Shen-yun Miao, Chao-Chun Liang, and Keh-Yih Su.
2020. A diverse corpus for evaluating and developing
English math word problem solvers. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 975–984, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot,
Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Did Aristotle
Use a Laptop? A Question Answering Benchmark
with Implicit Reasoning Strategies. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–
361.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-
Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten
Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus
Odena. 2021. Show Your Work: Scratchpads for
Intermediate Computation with Language Models.
ArXiv:2112.00114 [cs].

Leilani H. Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z. Yuan, Ayesha Ba-
jwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal. 2018. Ex-
plaining Explanations: An Overview of Interpretabil-
ity of Machine Learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th Inter-
national Conference on Data Science and Advanced
Analytics (DSAA), pages 80–89.

OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.

Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal.
2021. Are NLP models really able to solve simple
math word problems? In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 2080–2094, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

L. A. Harrington, M. D. Morley, A. Šcedrov, and S. G.
Simpson. 1985. Harvey Friedman’s Research on
the Foundations of Mathematics. Elsevier. Google-
Books-ID: 2plPRR4LDxIC.

Bernease Herman. 2019.
The Promise and Peril
of Human Evaluation for Model Interpretability.
arXiv:1711.07414 [cs, stat]. ArXiv: 1711.07414.

Silviu Pitis,
Michael R Zhang,
Andrew Wang,
and Jimmy Ba. 2023.
Boosted prompt ensem-
bles for large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05970.

Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards faith-
fully interpretable NLP systems: How should we
define and evaluate faithfulness?
In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 4198–4205. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Danish Pruthi, Mansi Gupta, Bhuwan Dhingra, Graham
Neubig, and Zachary C. Lipton. 2020. Learning to
deceive with attention-based explanations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 4782–
4793, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brah-
man, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, and
Yejin Choi. 2022. Maieutic Prompting: Logically

Jing Qian, Hong Wang, Zekun Li, Shiyang Li, and
Xifeng Yan. 2022.
Limitations of Language
Models in Arithmetic and Symbolic Induction.
ArXiv:2208.05051 [cs].

Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei,
Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. 2022. Least-
to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in
Large Language Models. ArXiv:2205.10625 [cs].

Marco Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin.
2016. “why should I trust you?”: Explaining the pre-
dictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 2016
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Demon-
strations, KDD ’16, pages 97–101, New York, NY,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. 2015. Solving general arith-
metic word problems. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1743–1752, Lisbon, Portu-
gal. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Gabriele Sarti, Nils Feldhus, Ludwig Sickert, and Os-
kar van der Wal. 2023.
Inseq: An interpretabil-
ity toolkit for sequence generation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13942.

Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle
Pineau, and William L. Hamilton. 2019. CLUTRR:
A diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from
text.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
4506–4515, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh,
and Himabindu Lakkaraju. 2020. Fooling LIME and
SHAP: Adversarial Attacks on Post hoc Explanation
Methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Con-
ference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 180–186.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA.

Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2023. Language Models Don’t
Always Say What They Think: Unfaithful Explana-
tions in Chain-of-Thought Prompting.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc
Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-Consistency Improves
Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models.
ArXiv:2203.11171 [cs].

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of Thought Prompting
Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models.

Kayo Yin and Graham Neubig. 2022. Interpreting lan-
guage models with contrastive explanations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.10419.

Hanlin Zhang, Ziyang Li, Jiani Huang, Mayur Naik,
and Eric Xing. 2022. Improved logical reasoning
of language models via differentiable symbolic pro-
gramming. In First Workshop on Pre-training: Per-
spectives, Pitfalls, and Paths Forward at ICML 2022.

A
Implementation Details

Math Word Problem (GSM8K)

Input
CoT output

Q: John plans to sell all his
toys and use the money to
buy video games. He has 13
lego sets and he sells them
for $15 each. He ends up
buying 8 videogames for $20
each and has $5 left. How
many lego sets does he still
have?

A: He started with 13 lego sets. He sold
them for $15 each. So he must have
gotten 13 * $15 = $195 from selling
them. He used this money to buy 8
video games for $20 each. This means
he spent 8 * $20 = $160 on the video
games. He had $5 left, so in total he
must have had $195 + $5 = $200. The
answer is 0.

In all our experiments, we use OpenAI GPT-3
(text-davinci-001
and
text-davinci-002)
and
Codex
(code-davinci-001
and
code-davinci-002) models through the Python
API available at beta.openai.com, from Sept,
2022 to Jan, 2023. The inference cost per example
is $0 for all Codex models since they are in limited
beta period, and $0.01 - $0.03 for GPT-3 models
depending on the dataset. It takes 2-15 seconds to
run inference on one example with Codex models
under a rate limit of 150,000 tokens/minute, and
1-8 seconds with GPT-3 models under 250,000
tokens/minute, also depending on the dataset.
For example, on the GSM8K test set of 1,319
examples, it takes 3.5h to finish the inference with
Codex and 2.3h with GPT-3.
We use the following hyper-parameters through-
out all experiments:
temperature: 0.0 for greedy decoding, 0.4 for
self-consistent decoding;
max_tokens: 1000;
n: 1 for greedy decoding, 40 for self-consistent
decoding;
frequency_penalty: 0;
presence_penalty: 0.
Any unspecified hyper-parameters are set to
the default value on
docs/api-reference/completions/create.

Multi-hop QA (StrategyQA)

CoT output
Input

A: The bee hummingbird is the smallest
bird in the world. The average weight of
a bee hummingbird is about 2 grams. A
single pea weighs about 0.1 grams.
Thus, a bee hummingbird could balance
a scale with a single pea on it. So the
answer is yes.

Q: Could a bee hummingbird
balance a scale with a single
pea on it?

Planning (SayCan)

Input

CoT output

The user has asked me to visit the table
and the counter, I will do so in that order.
1. ﬁnd(table), 2. pick(table), 3.
ﬁnd(counter), 4. put(counter), 5. done()

Visit the table and the
counter.

Figure 7: Examples of unfaithful output from CoT
prompting (Wei et al., 2022) on three datasets. The an-
swer (green) does not follow from the reasoning chain
(blue).

but the plan contains unnecessary “pick” and “put”
operations.

Wei et al. (2022) claim that CoT “provides an in-
terpretable window into the behavior of the model,
suggesting how it might have arrived at a partic-
ular answer and providing opportunities to debug
where the reasoning path went wrong". As we have
pointed out in Section 1, since CoT does not guar-
antee faithfulness, how the model arrives at the
answer could differ drastically from what is shown
in the reasoning chain. Furthermore, it is still hard
for the user to debug the model: even if they manu-
ally correct the reasoning chain and let the model
regenerate the answer, it might still be wrong, since
there is no causality between the reasoning chain
and the answer.

B
Extended Results

In this section, we present more results that do not
fit into the main text.

B.1
Examples of Unfaithful CoT Output

Figure 7 shows examples of unfaithful output from
the CoT method (Wei et al., 2022) on three datasets:
GSM8K (MWP), StrategyQA (Multi-hop QA), and
SayCan (Planning). Note that here we only show
model outputs that are apparently unfaithful. In
other cases, there is no known inconsistency be-
tween the reasoning chain and the answer, but this
still does not imply that the reasoning chain is a
faithful explanation, since the ground truth (how
the model predicts the answer) is unknown.
The GSM8K example is explained in Section 1.
In the StrategyQA example, though the reason-
ing chain correctly identifies that a hummingbird
weighs much more than a pea, the answer is still
“yes”; in the SayCan example, the reasoning chain
only mentions “visit the table and the counter”,

B.2
Comparison with Few-shot SOTA

We compare the results of Faithful CoT with the
published few-shot SOTA in Table 3. The Faithful
CoT results are obtained with the best-performing
LM among all five LMs we experiment with (see
Section C.3 on each dataset. The SOTA results are
obtained from the following sources:
GSM8K: OpenAI (2023);
MultiArith, ASDiv, StrategyQA: Wang et al.
(2022);
SVAMP: Chen et al. (2022);
AQuA: Pitis et al. (2023);

Math Word Problems
Planning
Multi-hop QA
Relation
Method
GSM8K
SVAMP
MultiArith
ASDiv
AQuA
SayCan
StrategyQA
Date
Sport
CLUTRR
Few-shot SOTA
92.0
89.1
100.0
87.8
76.4
88.3
81.6
76.2
98.5
50.9
Faithful CoT (ours)
95.0
95.4
99.2
95.6
73.6
93.2
65.2
95.8
99.3
71.9
δacc
+3.0
+6.3
-0.8
+7.8
-2.8
+4.9
-16.4
+19.6
+0.8
+21.0

Table 3: Comparison between the existing few-shot SOTA results and the optimal Faithful CoT results (with the
best-performing LM (code-davinci-002 for SayCan and CLUTRR, and gpt-4 for the rest of the datasets). See
Appendix B.2 for sources of SOTA results.

both papers have only tackled math reasoning and
symbolic reasoning tasks, we reimplement their
methods by using the “noNL” prompt in our ab-
lation study from Section 6.1. The comparison is
done with code-davinci-002 as the underlying
LM and greedy decoding.
As shown in Figure 8, on 6 of the 10 datasets
(including most MWP datasets, SayCan, and Date
Understanding), PAL/PoT and Faithful CoT have
very close accuracy (<2.0 difference). On AQuA,
PAL/PoT is visibly better. On the remaining three
datasets (StrategyQA, Sports Understanding, and
CLUTRR), Faithful CoT reasonably outperforms
PAL/PoT. This may suggest that our method has
an advantage when the task requires extensive ex-
ternal knowledge (e.g., StrategyQA and Sports Un-
derstanding) or when the SL is not frequent in the
LM’s pretraining data (e.g., Datalog, or our self-
defined relational expressions).
Finally, note that the key contribution of our
method lies in interpretability. Though the addition
of structured NL comments sometimes does not
make a difference in performance, it does make the
reasoning chain more understandable to the user.
Furthermore, it may even enable users without a
programming background to debug the model, by
only interacting with the NL subproblems (e.g.,
adding/removing/editing a subproblem), which is
worth further exploration in the future.

PAL/PoT
Faithful CoT

100.0

75.0

50.0

25.0

0.0

SVAMP

AQUA

StrategyQA

ASDiv

GSM8K

MultiArith

date

saycan

CLUTRR

sports

Figure 8: Accuracy of our method and two concur-
rent methods, Program of Thoughts (POT) (Chen et al.,
2022) and Program-Aided Language Models (PAL)
(Gao et al., 2022), on 10 reasoning datasets.

SayCan, Sports Understanding: (Wei et al.,
2022);
Date Understanding: (Gao et al., 2022);
CLUTRR: Our implementation of LtM prompt-
ing (Zhou et al., 2022) (no existing work reports
few-shot performance on CLUTRR with K up to
10).
With Codex and GPT-4, Faithful CoT sets new
SOTA performance on 7 out of the 10 datasets
across four domains, achieving 95.0+ accuracy on
6 of them.

B.3
Empirical Comparison with Concurrent
Work

Two pieces of concurrent work, Program of
Thoughts (PoT) (Chen et al., 2022) and Program-
Aided Language Models (PAL) (Gao et al., 2022),
were announced on arXiv within three months of
our work. Essentially, they both generate Python
programs, or SL-only reasoning chains, to derive
the answer. Our approach differs from them mainly
in the additional component of structured NL com-
ments, which decomposes the original problem into
simpler, inter-dependent subproblems.
Aside from the qualitative differences high-
lighted in Section 2, we perform an empirical per-
formance comparison with them on the same set
of 10 datasets used in our main evaluation. Since

C
Extended Analysis

C.1
Ablation Study

Table 4 shows the full results of the ablation study
from Section 6.1.

C.2
Robustness to Prompt Phrasing

We study the sensitivity of our method to subtle dif-
ferences in the prompt design. We experiment with
three prompt variations: 1. randomly permuting
the order of independent subquestions/reasoning
steps; 2: Changing the variable names; 3. chang-
ing the nudge line (e.g. from “# To answer this

Notably, with GPT-4 as the underlying LM,
Faithful CoT results in 95.0+ accuracy in 4 of the 5
MWP datasets, far outperforming the previous few-
shot SOTA on three of them (GSM8K, SVAMP,
and ASDiv).

Prompt
GSM8K
Date
SayCan
CLUTRR
Full
72.3
81.6
89.3
58.9
No rationale
75.4
83.0
-
51.8
No NL but nudge
73.5
80.2
-
39.6
No NL
72.8
79.7
90.3
9.3
No solver
21.5
57.9
90.3
40.9

C.4
Enforcing Constraints

Table 4: Ablation study results that accompany Figure 5.
We report accuracy when we remove different parts of
the prompt.

Since our generated reasoning chain contains struc-
tured components (e.g., dependency graphs), an-
other natural question to ask is: will it be helpful
to enforce certain constraints on the generation?
Using MWP datasets as a case study, we examine
the effect of three such constraints:
Graph validity. The dependency graph must
be a Directed Cyclic Graph (DAG), e.g., it is not
allowed for a subquestion to depend on itself.
No over-dependency. The code cannot depend
on any variable that its corresponding subquestion
has not mentioned, e.g. in Figure 4, since Q5 says
“depend on 4”, then the corresponding code should
not use the variable eggs_in_dozen, since it is not
the output of Q4.
No under-dependency. The code must depend
on all variables that its corresponding subquestion
has mentioned, e.g. in the same example, since Q5
says “depend on 4”, then the corresponding code
must use the variable eggs_in_dozen.
We investigate the effect of adding constraints
on the generations under self-consistent decoding.
Starting with our original results (without any con-
straint), we add a different set of constraints at each
time and report the accuracy change in Table 7. In-
dividually, the graph validity constraint results in
little to no change in the performance, but the other
two constraints lead to a more unstable change–
mostly a decrease–across datasets. Adding two or
more constraints further lowers the performance in
almost all cases except on MultiArith (the easiest
dataset), revealing the tradeoff between accuracy
and satisfying the constraints. It also indicates that
a proportion of generations (1.0% to 8.9%) in our
existing results do not satisfy all constraints. How-
ever, it may still be worth enforcing some of these
constraints (e.g., graph validity) at the cost of per-
formance, in order for users to better control and
interact with the model.

Prompt
GSM8K
Date
SayCan
CLUTRR
Original
72.3
81.6
89.3
58.9
Variation 1
69.1
84.4
88.3
-
Variation 2
70.3
81.6
90.3
56.2
Variation 3
70.2
80.5
87.4
55.9
Mean
70.5
82.0
88.8
57.0
Std
1.3
1.7
1.3
1.7

Table 5: Robustness to prompt phrasing.

question, write a Python program to answer the fol-
lowing subquestions” to “# To solve this question,
we answer each of the following subquestions with
a Python program”).
We rerun the evaluation of all three variations on
4 datasets (when applicable) used in the Section 6,
under greedy decoding. Table 5 shows the results.
Overall, the performance is quite stable, always
above each baseline on all four datasets.

C.3
Model Sensitivity

In this section, we want to answer the ques-
tion: how much does the choice of LM mat-
ter?
All results in Section 5 are obtained us-
ing code-davinci-002. Here, we examine the
effect of using four alternative code-generation
models as the Translator:
code-davinci-001,
text-davinci-002, text-davinci-003, gpt-4.
We compare our method with the three baselines
using each of the above LM on five MWP datasets,
using the greedy decoding strategy.
As shown in Table 6, regardless of the underly-
ing LM, Faithful CoT consistently outperforms all
baselines on the vast majority of the datasets, and
performs very closely with the best method (<2.0
difference) on the remaining ones. On average, it
has a relative accuracy gain of 16.1%, 11.0%, 9.4%,
and 4.6 % over the best-performing method among
the baselines, for each LM respectively. This in-
dicates that even though the absolute performance
varies depending on the LM, Faithful CoT brings a
relatively consistent accuracy gain.

D
Human Evaluation Details

We hire crowd workers on Prolific to evaluate the
correctness of model-generated reasoning chains
that result in a correct answer.
We sample

Method / Dataset
GSM8K
SVAMP
MultiArith
ASDiv
AQuA
Average
LM: code-davinci-001
Standard
5.2
28.7
8.6
38.5
22.8
20.8
CoT
14.7
41.2
57.2
50.4
22.4
37.2
LtM
9.8
44.9
18.5
46.6
20.5
28.1
Faithful CoT (ours)
27.4
50.8
63.3
53.7
20.9
43.2
LM: text-davinci-002
Standard
15.4
65.2
34.1
64.8
24.0
40.7
CoT
47.2
68.0
91.1
69.9
40.6
63.4
LtM
32.9
73.8
68.3
70.9
34.6
56.1
Faithful CoT (ours)
62.7
80.0
92.8
75.4
41.3
70.4
LM: text-davinci-003
Standard
16.9
69.4
38.8
59.1
29.5
42.7
CoT
59.6
79.5
95.0
69.1
46.9
70.0
LtM
34.6
79.5
73.7
70.0
44.5
60.5
Faithful CoT (ours)
71.7
85.1
94.5
80.7
50.8
76.6
LM: gpt-4
Standard
46.9
88.4
98.7
70.2
50.4
70.9
CoT
64.9
80.0
94.0
71.6
75.2
77.1
LtM
91.8
92.9
98.3
86.7
72.0
87.5
Faithful CoT (ours)
95.0
95.4
98.5
95.6
73.6
91.6

Table 6: Accuracy of different prompting methods with each underlying LM on 5 MWP reasoning datasets.

Constraint
GSM8K
SVAMP
MultiArith
ASDiv
AQuA
None
80.0
88.8
99.2
84.4
61.4
+ G
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-0.8
+ O
-0.9
-0.1
-0.1
+0.4
-3.9
+ U
-1.0
-3.6
0.0
-1.2
+1.2
+ GO
-1.7
-0.4
-0.1
+0.2
-3.9
+ GU
-1.0
-3.7
0.0
-1.2
+0.8
+ OU
-4.0
-5.4
-0.1
-2.6
-4.3
+ GOU
-5.0
-5.9
-0.1
-3.2
-5.5

Table 7: Accuracy change after enforcing different con-
straints on the generation. The “None” row shows the
original performance without any constraint (from Ta-
ble 1). Each row below adds a different set of con-
straints: G stands for “graph validity”, O for “no over-
dependency”, and U for “no under-dependency”. Re-
sults are on all MWP datasets under self-consistent de-
coding.

Figure 9: Example of our annotation interface for the
CLUTRR survey

annotate this dataset themselves.

100 reasoning chains for each domain generated
by code-davinci-002 with the greedy decod-
ing strategy, where each set of 100 contains an
equal number of samples from all datasets within
the domain.
We further require annotators to
have experience coding in the programming lan-
guage of the dataset they annotate (Python for
MWP/CLUTRR/Sports/Date, and Scala for Strat-
egyQA, as Datalog was not an option in Prolific).
We have a single survey for each domain, with
the exception of Multi-hop QA (in this case, we
have separate surveys for StrategyQA, Date, and
Sports, given the different nature of each dataset).
Additionally, there was no way to ensure annota-
tors knew PPDL on Prolific. In order to ensure
high-quality annotations for SayCan, the authors

Annotation Process
Each of the 100 questions
for each domain is annotated by at least three an-
notators. Each annotator is given 10 questions to
annotate. A screenshot of our survey interface is
shown in Figure 9. At the start of the survey, an-
notators are given examples of a correct reasoning
chain, a reasoning chain with incorrect NL, and a
reasoning chain with incorrect SL. The examples
match the domain of reasoning chains in each sur-
vey. As an attention and understanding check, we
ask annotators to label an example they had just
seen. If the annotator fails this question, they are
sent to the end of the survey and their responses
are filtered out. We also manually filter out all
spammers (annotators who answer with the same

Domain
Correct
Incorrect NL
Incorrect SL
Flawed Question
Confused
Agreement

MWP
92.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
0.790
Planning
94.0
3.9
2.1
0.0
0.0
0.947
StrategyQA
66.7
30.3
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.455
Date
87.9
6.1
6.1
0.0
0.0
0.788
Sports
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.899
Relation
88.0
6.0
0.0
5.0
1.0
0.683

Table 8: Numerical results for human evaluation of reasoning chain correctness, accompanying Figure 6. Each row
represents the percent (0-100) of different answer choices selected by human evaluators in each domain/dataset, as
well as the inter-annotator agreement.

• SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021):

github.com/arkilpatel/SVAMP,
MIT li-
cense:
SVAMP/blob/main/LICENSE.

response repeatedly or complete the survey in un-
der 3 minutes). After the surveys are complete,
we compute annotator agreement and then take the
majority label for each reasoning chain as the fi-
nal label in our analysis. Our annotator population
consists of 100 annotators with an average age of
25 years and an average income of 40k per year.
87.9% of the annotators are males and 56% have a
four year college degree. Annotators are compen-
sated at $16/hr, and average 2 minutes per question.
Our full study cost $280. Sample instructions for
the CLUTRR survey can be found in the Supple-
mentary Materials.

• MultiArith (Roy and Roth, 2015), license: CC
BY 4.0.

• ASDiv (Miao et al., 2020):
com/chaochun/nlu-asdiv-dataset.

• AQuA
(Ling
et
al.,
2017):

//github.com/deepmind/AQuA,
license:

blob/master/LICENSE.

E
Dataset Details

Multi-hop QA

E.1
Statistics

• StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021):
we use
the
open-domain
setting
(question-only
set) from (BIG-Bench collaboration, 2021):

tree/main/bigbench/benchmark_tasks/
strategyqa.

We show the dataset details in Table 9, including
the statistics, the number of few-shot exemplars
used in the prompt, and example inputs and out-
puts.
In particular, we notice that in one of our base-
lines Wei et al. (2022), the reported number of
exemplars used in the prompt is inconsistent be-
tween the main text (10) and the appendix (6). To
ensure fair comparison, we rerun the baseline with
10 exemplars for our results in Table 1, which is
what we use for our method.

• Date
Understanding
and
Sports
Under-
standing
from
BIG-Bench
(BIG-Bench
collaboration, 2021): Apache License v.2:

blob/main/LICENSE.

Planning

E.2
URLs and Licenses

We use the same distribution of datasets following
Wei et al. (2022):

• SayCan
(Ahn
et
al.,
2022):
SayCan
dataset can be accessed at
github.io/ under CC BY 4.0 license.

Math Word Problems

Relational Reasoning

• GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021):

github.com/openai/grade-school-math,
MIT
license:

openai/grade-school-math/blob/
master/LICENSE.

• CLUTRR (Sinha et al., 2019):
github.com/facebookresearch/clutrr,
license:

facebookresearch/clutrr/blob/main/

Domain
Dataset
# Shot
# Test
Example

GSM8K
8
1,319
Q: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many
clips in May. How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
A: 72
SVAMP
8
1,000
Q: Each pack of dvds costs 76 dollars. If there is a discount of 25 dollars on each
pack. How much do you have to pay to buy each pack?
A: 51
MultiArith
8
600
Q: For Halloween Debby and her sister combined the candy they received. Debby
had 32 pieces of candy while her sister had 42. If they ate 35 pieces the first night,
how many pieces do they have left?
A: 39
ASDiv
8
2,096
Q: Seven red apples and two green apples are in the basket. How many apples are
in the basket?
A: 9
AQuA
8
254
Q: A car finishes a journey in 20 hours at the speed of 60 km/hr. If the same
distance is to be covered in 10 hours, how much speed does the car gain?
A: “120 kmph”

Math
Word
Problems

StrategyQA
6
2,290
Q: Did Aristotle use a laptop?
A: False
Date
Understanding
10
359
Q: Yesterday was April 30, 2021. What is the date tomorrow in MM/DD/YYYY?
A: “05/02/2021”
Sports
Understanding
10
977
Q: Is the following sentence plausible: “Lebron James hit the turnaround jumper”?
A: True

Multi-
hop
QA

Planning
SayCan
7
103
Q: Could you get me a drink with caffeine?
A: “1.find(redbull)
2.pick(redbull)
3.find(user)
4.put(redbull)
5.done().”

CLUTRR
8
1,042
Q: [Carlos] is [Clarence]’s brother. [Carlos] and his sister, [Annie], went shopping.
[Annie] asked her mom [Valerie] if she wanted anything, but [Valerie] said no.
How is [Valerie] related to [Clarence]?
A: “mother”

Relational
Inference

Table 9: Datasets used for evaluation. “# Shot” stands for the number of few-shot examples in the prompt (following
Wei et al. (2022)) and “# Test” stands for the number of test examples.

LICENSE.
We obtain the publicly dis-
tributed
version
available
at

//drive.google.com/file/d/1SEq_
e1IVCDDzsBIBhoUQ5pOVH5kxRoZF/view,
specifically the data_089907f8 split.

length of X?”, where the answer consists of two val-
ues). In their implementation, only the first value
is extracted as the ground truth answer, which is
then compared against model outputs. This might
artificially inflate the final accuracy. To fix this, we
extract all values in the answer as a set and compare
model outputs against it.
Date Understanding: We find a number of
wrong answers in the test set. For example, for the
question “Jane and John married on Jan 2, 1958. It
is their 5-year anniversary today. What is the date
today in MM/DD/YYYY?”, the provided answer is
“01/02/1961”, whereas the correct answer should be
“01/02/1963”. We manually correct these answers,
and the resulting test set has the same number of
examples as the original one.
Sports Understanding: We notice a few am-
biguities with the Sports Understanding dataset.
For instance, running out of bounds is illegal in
many sports. The phrase "Domantas Sabonis ran
out of bounds" is labeled as implausible, however,
Domantas Sabonis is a basketball player, and bas-
ketball players can indeed run out of bounds on

We use all the above datasets for research pur-
poses only, consistent with their intended use.

E.3
Data Cleaning

We perform manual cleaning on ASDiv, Date Un-
derstanding, Sports Understanding, and SayCan as
we discover a number of annotation issues. In our
experiment, we rerun all baselines on our cleaned
version of the test sets. They are provided in our
repository to assist future research.
Specifically, we clean each of the datasets as
follows:
ASDiv: We start with the test set used by Wei
et al. (2022), which removes all questions with
float-valued and string-valued answers. However,
in their released version, we notice an error in the
answer extraction step for questions with more than
one value in the answer (e.g., “what is the width and

CLUTRR: this dataset is split into multiple
folds. There is a training fold with K ∈{2, 3}
(where K is the number of intermediate steps re-
quired to reach the answer), and one test fold for
each K from 2 to 10. We construct the few-shot
prompt using exemplars from the training fold, and
test our method on the concatenation of all test
folds.

the court. We remove 8 questions with such action-
based ambiguities. Additionally, since the release
of this dataset, a few new athletes have risen to
fame with identical names to those mentioned in
the dataset. For example, the question "Chris Paul
struck out the side" is implausible, as the refer-
enced “Chris Paul” is a famous basketball player.
However, “Chris Paul” is also the name of a new
MLB baseball player, in which case this statement
is plausible. We remove 5 questions with such
name-based ambiguities.
SayCan: We discover a few issues in the test
set: (1) the environment setup (e.g., the list of ob-
jects, the list of locations, and the initial location
of each object) is not the same for all examples; (2)
the annotation of the ground truth answer is often
incomplete (i.e., for a given task like “visit all loca-
tions”, there exist many possible plans in terms of
the order of locations visited, but not all of them are
included in the annotation); (3) there are ambigu-
ous descriptions in certain queries, for example,
in “Could you get me something refreshing?”, it
is unclear what drinks are considered “refreshing”.
For these questions, we complete the annotation
whenever possible, and filter out the rest. The re-
sulting test set contains 103 examples out of the
original 120.

F
Error Analysis

To further investigate where our method still fails,
we inspect 100 errors10 from model predictions on
each of the four datasets and manually annotate the
error categories.

F.1
GSM8K

Figure 10: Error analysis for GSM8K. For a detailed
description of the error categories, see Appendix F.1.

As shown in Figure 10, we categorize the errors
on GSM8K into 6 types, inversely sorted with fre-
quency:
Wrong Subquestion (49%): The LM produces a
wrong NL subquestion, which eventually leads to
the incorrect answer. While this is the majority
error type in our sample, it is worth noting that in a
typical human-in-the-loop collaboration, these er-
rors are easily fixable. Even if the user is unfamiliar
with programming, they can inspect the NL sub-
questions and potentially correct the model error
by simply deleting or editing a wrong subquestion.
Wrong Code (24%): The NL subquestion is cor-
rect, but the code fails to answer the subquestion
correctly. For example, the code uses a variable
that has not been previously defined.
Semantic Understanding Error (12%): The LM
incorrectly interprets certain semantic subtleties in
the query. This is the most complex and most in-
teresting error category. For example, consider the

E.4
Dataset Splits

As stated in Section 4.1, we use the official splits
whenever possible: training set for exemplar selec-
tion, validation set for prompt tuning, and test set
for evaluation. In cases where they are available,
we adopt the following strategies for each dataset:
GSM8K: it only has training and test sets. We
form the validation set by randomly sampling 1,000
examples from the training set.
Other MWP datasets: for AQuA, we use the
official training/validation/test split. For the other
datasets, only the test sets are used, since we have
the same prompt for GSM8K and them.
Date Understanding and Sports Understand-
ing: they only have test sets. We follow Wei et al.
(2022) to select the same number of examples from
the test set to form the few-shot prompt and use the
remaining examples as a new test set.
SayCan: Following Wei et al. (2022), we manu-
ally write 7 few-shot exemplars, since no training
set is provided. We evaluate the models on our
cleaned version of the test set, described in the
previous subsection.

10To encourage sample diversity, we embed all the errors
using text-davinci-002 and cluster the embeddings using
spectral clustering. This produces around 70 clusters of differ-
ent sizes, from which we gather 100 samples using importance
sampling.

# 1. How many pounds will Martin lose per week if he eats Cheerios every day for breakfast? (independent, support:
["he’ll lose 1.25 pounds/week"])
pounds_lost_cheerios = 1.25
# 2. How many pounds will Martin gain per week if he eats donuts every day for breakfast? (independent, support:
["he’ll gain 1.75 pounds/week"]) pounds_gained_donuts = 1.75
# 3. How many weeks are there in 5 weeks? (independent, support: ["External knowledge: there are 7 days in a
week"])
weeks_in_5_weeks = 5
# 4. How many pounds will Martin lose in 5 weeks if he eats Cheerios every day for breakfast? (depends on 1 and 3,
support: [])
pounds_lost_cheerios_5_weeks = pounds_lost_cheerios * weeks_in_5_weeks
# 5. How many pounds will Martin gain in 5 weeks if he eats donuts every day for breakfast? (depends on 2 and 3,
support: [])
pounds_gained_donuts_5_weeks = pounds_gained_donuts * weeks_in_5_weeks
# 6. What will be the difference in his weight at the end of 5 weeks between the two breakfast options? (depends on
4 and 5, support: [])
difference_5_weeks = pounds_gained_donuts_5_weeks - pounds_lost_cheerios_5_weeks
# 7. Final Answer: What will be the difference in his weight at the end of 5 weeks between the two breakfast
options? (depends on 6, support: [])
answer = difference_5_weeks

Table 10: Generated code for the question in Appendix F.1, as an example of "semantic understanding error".

F.2
StrategyQA

following problem:

As mentioned in Section 5, Figure 11 shows the
error type distribution on a sample of 70 instances
from StrategyQA, where we specifically compare
the cases where the prediction of CoT is correct
whereas ours is wrong.

If Martin eats Cheerios every day for
breakfast, he’ll lose 1.25 pounds/week.
If he eats donuts every day for breakfast,
he’ll gain 1.75 pounds/week. What will
be the difference in his weight at the end
of 5 weeks between the two breakfast op-
tions?

The generated code, as shown in Table 10, does not
assign opposite polarities (signs) for “pounds lost”
vs. “pounds gained”. For other examples in this
category, we notice errors like missing that a pair
of something has 2 items in it, missing to subtract
2 for “two years ago” when it occurs as a subjunc-
tive, and so on. Fixing these errors, in general, will
require more than providing additional examples
in the prompt.
Generation Cutoff (7%): The generation stops
midway, mainly due to the LM producing the same
steps over and over again. These errors could be
easily detected in postprocessing and possibly fixed
by re-prompting the LM.
Wrong Gold Label (5%): We find 5 (out of our
100) examples that are genuine annotation errors
in the gold labels.
Missing Subquestion (3%): The LM misses a rel-
evant subquestion needed for the rest of the reason-
ing chain to work. These errors are also potentially
fixable via human-in-the-loop interaction, where
the user can insert a subquestion into the reasoning
chain.

Figure 11: Error analysis for StrategyQA. For a detailed
description of the error categories, see Section F.2.

There are 8 error types, from most to least fre-
quent:
Syntax (29%): these are syntax-related errors
that result in an invalid Datalog program. For exam-
ple, the LM redefines a relation that is previously
declared, uses an invalid string comparison opera-
tion, generates an ungrounded variable in the an-
swer definition, and so on. With further pretraining
on Datalog, we believe Codex is able to overcome
these errors to a reasonable extent.
Infinite Loop (24%): the LM generates an in-

finite loop of subquestions, which are oftentimes
rather philosophical. For example, for the question
“Are potatoes native to the European continent?”,
the LM generates a list of 40 subquestions (poten-
tially more, if not truncated by the token limit):

to answer the question, “Do solo pianists require
a conductor?”, the model correctly generates the
relevant subquestions and their respective answers:

1. What is the definition of a solo pianist?
A solo pianist is a pianist who performs
alone.
2. What is the definition of a conductor?
A conductor is a person who leads an or-
chestra.
3. What is the definition of an orchestra?
An orchestra is a large instrumental en-
semble that contains string, brass, wood-
wind, and percussion instruments.

1. Where are potatoes native to?
Potatoes are native to the Andes.
2. Which continent is the Andes in?
The Andes is in South America.
3. Which continent is South America in?
South America is in the Americas.
4. Which continent is the Americas in?
The Americas is in the Western Hemi-
sphere.
5.
Which hemisphere is the Western
Hemisphere in?
The Western Hemisphere is in the Earth.
6. Which continent is the Earth in?
The Earth is in the Solar System.
......
11. Which continent is the Universe in?
The Universe is in the Multiverse.
12. Which continent is the Multiverse
in?
The Multiverse is in the Omniverse.
13. Which continent is the Omniverse
in?
The Omniverse is in the Metaverse.
14. Which continent is the Metaverse in?
The Metaverse is in the Hyperverse.
......
39. Which continent is the Quattuorde-
caverse in?
The Quattuordecaverse is in the Quinde-
caverse.
40. Which continent is the Quindeca-
verse in?

But in deriving the final answer, the reasoning
is wrong: “Now, we derive the final answer: Do
solo pianists require a conductor? The answer is
Yes only if a solo pianist is not a conductor.”
Wrong Knowledge (10%): the LM fails to re-
trieve the correct knowledge to answer the subques-
tions. For example, given the original question
“Is the largest city in New Mexico also known as
Yootó?”, the model correctly generates the subques-
tions “What is the largest city in New Mexico?”
(answer: Albuquerque) and “Is Albuquerque also
known as Yootó?”. However, when answering the
second subquestion, it retrieves a wrong piece of
knowledge (“Albuquerque is also known as Yootó.”,
whereas in reality, it should be “Santa Fe” that is
known as Yootó).
Answer Definition (6%): In our prompt, we
always derive the answer in the format of “The
answer is Yes only if ...”, which is followed by a
Datalog rule containing conditions that should be
satisfied for the answer to be true. However, the
LM sometimes generates this as “The answer is No
only if ...”, which outputs the reversed answer.
Knowledge Representation (3%):
The re-
trieved knowledge in NL is correct, but the rep-
resentation of it in Datalog is wrong. For example,
for the piece of knowledge “The Lucy Show is not
the same TV series as JAG (TV series)”, the model
represents it as follows:

We notice that this type of errors also happen if
the prompt does not include Datalog code but just
the NL subquestions, but much less often.
Wrong Subquestions (17%): The LM generates
an irrelevant subquestion to the original question.
For instance, given the question, “Would toast for a
vegan have margarine instead of butter?”, one sub-
question that is generated is “What is the difference
between a vegan and a vegetarian?”, which does
not help with reaching the final answer.
Wrong Reasoning (10%): The subquestions are
correct, but the reasoning from the retrieved facts
to the final answer is problematic. For example,

.decl Same_TV_series(TV_series1:symbol,
TV_series2:symbol)
Same_TV_series("The Lucy Show", "JAG (TV
series)").”

which actually means the reverse (they are the
same).
Unknown (1%): There is a very small propor-
tion of errors (1 out of 70) where we are unsure

of the cause. Specifically, we expect the solver to
output True, but it outputs False instead.

(and
(not (at jalapeno-chips counter))
(not (at jalapeno-chips table))
(not (at jalapeno-chips trash))
(not (at jalapeno-chips bowl))
(not (at jalapeno-chips user))
)
)

F.3
Date Understanding

Wrong Object (36%): Here the model gener-
ates the wrong object/object types in the goal. For
example, a request such as “I opened a pepsi ear-
lier. How would you bring me an open can?” fails
because the model generates actions with water
instead of Pepsi.

F.5
CLUTRR

Figure 12: Error analysis for Date Understanding. For
a detailed description of the error categories, see Ap-
pendix F.3.

Unlike GSM8K, we only have 69 errors out of
the 359 test examples, so we annotate them all, as
shown in Figure 12. The error categories for date
understanding are similar to GSM8K, except that
we do not see any generation errors in the samples,
but we see questions with ambiguous phrasing al-
lowing both the gold and predicted answers to be
correct based on interpretation.

Figure 14: Error analysis for CLUTRR. For a detailed
description of the error categories, see Section F.5.

F.4
SayCan

For CLUTRR, we group all error cases by K,
the number of steps in their gold reasoning chain,
as a proxy for problem complexity, and perform
importance sampling on these groups to select 100
examples. Our annotation of these examples re-
veals 5 error categories, as shown in Figure 14:
Inversed Relation (41%): This stands out as the
majority of the errors. These errors are caused by
the reversal of directional relationships for the ac-
tors in the problem, i.e., predicting “mother” or
“nephew” when the answer is “daughter” or “uncle”
respectively.
Wrong Relation (30%): Here the model extracts
the relation incorrectly (not even the inverse). For
example, for the subquestion “How is [Donald]
related to [Jason]?”
with the correctly identi-
fied support “[Jason] is father of their father”, the
model produces relation(Donald, Jason) =
son when the correct relation should be “grand-
son”.
Nonexistent Relation (4%): The model halluci-
nates a non-existent relation (e.g. “adopted” for

Figure 13: Error analysis for SayCan. For a detailed
description of the error categories, see Section F.4.

Since SayCan only has 120 test examples and
Faithful CoT produces 7 errors, we annotate all 7
of them, as shown in Figure 13. These 7 examples
can be categorized into two types:
Additional Subgoals (64%): Cases where the
model generated unnecessary subgoals in the de-
composition of the original task, leading the plan-
ner astray. This is illustrated by the request “Clear
the jalapeno chips off the counter”:

(:goal

daughter).
Wrong Path (12%): Here, the model does not gen-
erate a correct reasoning path from target entity A
to target entity B in the question.
Wrong Gold Label (13%): These are annotation
errors in the CLUTRR dataset. In one example, for
the sentence, “[Gloria] asked her mother [Laura]
if she could go outside and play with her friends.”,
the annotation says Laura is Gloria’s grandmother.

G
Prompts

Due to the space limit, we show one exemplar in
the prompt for each dataset here. The full prompts
can be found in our repository.
Among all the MWP datasets, our prompt for
AQuA is different from the rest, because the an-
swers are in a multiple-choice format instead of
integers. To produce a multiple-choice answer, we
take a two-step approach by first producing a nu-
merical answer in the same way as for the other
math datasets. Then, we perform an additional step
of converting the numerical answer into an answer
choice by again prompting the language model to
generate which answer choice is closest to the pre-
viously produced numerical answer. An exemplar
of this 2-step prompt is shown in Table 11.

EXEMPLAR FOR AQUA

Step 1: Answer Prediction
# Question: In a flight of 600 km, an aircraft was slowed down due to bad weather. Its average speed for the trip was reduced by
200 km/hr and the time of flight increased by 30 minutes. The duration of the flight is:

# Answer option: [’A)1 hour’, ’B)2 hours’, ’C)3 hours’, ’D)4 hours’, ’E)5 hours’]
# Write Python code to solve the following questions. Store your result as a variable named ’answer’.
# 1. What was the duration of the flight? (independent, support: ["The duration of the flight is"])
duration = Symbol(’duration’, positive=True)
# 2. What is the delay of the flight? (independent, support: ["the time of flight increased by 30 minutes"])
delay = 30 / 60
# 3. What was the total flight distance? (independent, support: ["In a flight of 600 km"])
total_distance = 600
# 4. What was the original speed? (depends on 1 and 3, support: ["External knowledge: speed is distance over time"])
original_speed = total_distance / duration
# 5. What was the reduced speed? (depends on 1, 2, and 3, support: [])
reduced_speed = total_distance / (duration + delay)
# 6. What was the duration of the flight if the original speed was 200 km/hr faster than the reduced speed? (depends on 4, 5, and
1, support: [])
solution = solve_it(original_speed - reduced_speed - 200, duration)
answer = solution[duration]

Step 2: Multiple Choice Conversion
# Question: In a flight of 600 km, an aircraft was slowed down due to bad weather. Its average speed for the trip was reduced by
200 km/hr and the time of flight increased by 30 minutes. The duration of the flight is:

# Answer option: [’A)1 hour’, ’B)2 hours’, ’C)3 hours’, ’D)4 hours’, ’E)5 hours’]
# Prediction: 1.00000000000000
# Closest Option: A

Table 11: An exemplar from our prompt for AQuA.

EXEMPLAR FOR GSM8K, SVAMP, MULTIARITH, AND ASDIV
# Q: There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After they are done, there will be 21 trees.
How many trees did the grove workers plant today?

# To answer this question, write a Python program to answer the following subquestions:
# 1. How many trees are there in the beginning? (independent, support: ["There are 15 trees"])
trees_begin = 15
# 2. How many trees are there in the end? (independent, support: ["there will be 21 trees"])
trees_end = 21
# 3. How many trees did the grove workers plant today? (depends on 1 and 2, support: [])
trees_today = trees_end - trees_begin
# 4. Final Answer: How many trees did the grove workers plant today? (depends on 3, support: [])
answer = trees_today

Table 12: An exemplar from our prompt for GSM8K, SVAMP, MultiArith, and ASDiv.

EXEMPLAR FOR STRATEGYQA
// Q: Would a pear sink in water?

// To answer this question, we answer the following subquestions:
// 1. What is the density of a pear?
// The density of a pear is about 0.6g/cm3.
// 2. What is the density of water?
// Water has a density of 1g/cm3.

// Then, we represent these answers in Datalog:
// 1. The density of a pear is about 0.6g/cm3.
.decl Has_density(Object:symbol, Density:float)
Has_density("pear", 0.6).
// 2. Water has a density of 1g/cm3.
Has_density("water", 1).

// Now, we derive the final answer: Would a pear sink in water?
// The answer is Yes only if the density of a pear is more than the density of water.
.decl Answer()
Answer() :- Has_density("pear", density1), Has_density("water", density2), density1 > density2.
.output Answer

Table 13: An exemplar from our prompt for StrategyQA.

EXEMPLAR FOR DATE UNDERSTANDING
# Q: Yesterday was April 30, 2021. What is the date tomorrow in MM/DD/YYYY?

# To answer this question, we write a program to answer the following subquestions:
# import relevant packages
from datetime import date, time, datetime
from dateutil.relativedelta import relativedelta
# 1. What is the date yesterday? (independent, support: ["Yesterday was April 30, 2021"])
date_yesterday = date(2021,4,30)
# 2. What is the date today? (depends on 1, support: ["Yesterday was April 30, 2021"])
date_today = date_yesterday + relativedelta(days=1)
# 3. What is the date tomorrow? (depends on 2, support: [])
date_tomorrow = date_today + relativedelta(days=1)
# 4. Final Answer: What is the date tomorrow in MM/DD/YYYY? (depends on 3, support: [])
answer = date_tomorrow.strftime("%m/%d/%Y")

Table 14: An exemplar from our prompt for Date Understanding.

EXEMPLAR FOR SPORTS UNDERSTANDING
# Q: Is the following statement plausible? Sam Darnold passed the puck

# To answer this question, write a Python program to answer the following subquestions:
# 1. Sam Darnold is a player in which sport? (independent, support: ["Sam Darnold is an NFL Quarterback", "NFL is the
National Football League"])
player_sport = "football"
# 2. The phrase "passed the puck" implies playing which sport? (independent, support: ["Players pass the puck in hockey"])
playing_sport = "hockey"
# 3. Is the following statement plausible? Sam Darnold passed the puck (depends on 1 and 2, support: ["Sam Darnold is an NFL
Quarterback", "NFL is the National Football League", "Players pass the puck in hockey"])
plausibility = (player_sport == playing_sport)
# 4. Is the following statement plausible? Sam Darnold passed the puck (depends on 3, support: [])
answer = int(plausibility)

Table 15: An exemplar from our prompt for Sports Understanding.

EXEMPLAR FOR SAYCAN
User query: Bring me something not sweet to eat.

Goal in PDDL:
(:goal
; I need to find a snack
(exists (?s - snack)
; it has to satisfy the following conditions
(and
; the snack must not be sweet
(not (is-sweet ?s))
; bring it to the user
(at ?s user)
)
)
)

Table 16: An exemplar from our prompt for SayCan.

EXEMPLAR FOR CLUTRR
# Context: [Jason] always had some great adventure planned for his granddaughter [Guillermina] when she came to visit. So,
naturally, when [Myrna] told her daughter [Guillermina] that they would be going to visit [Jason] she could hardly contain
herself.

# Question: How is [Jason] related to [Myrna]?
# To answer this question, we write a program to answer the following subquestions:
# 1. How is [Jason] related to [Guillermina]? (independent, support: "[Jason] always had some great adventure planned for his
granddaughter [Guillermina] when she came to visit.")
relation(Jason, Guillermina) = grandfather
# 2. How is [Guillermina] related to [Myrna]? (independent, support: "So, naturally, when [Myrna] told her daughter
[Guillermina] that they would be going to visit [Jason] she could hardly contain herself.")
relation(Guillermina, Myrna) = daughter
# 3. Final answer: How is [Jason] related to [Myrna]? (depends on 1, 2)
relation(Jason, Myrna) = relation(Jason, Guillermina) @ relation(Guillermina, Myrna)

Table 17: An exemplar from our prompt for CLUTRR.