Daniele Di Pompeo
University of L’Aquila
L’Aquila, Italy

Michele Tucci
Charles University
Prague, Czech Republic

allocation). Even when automated, ﬁnding and creating Pareto
boundaries can frequently take many hours or even days.
Therefore, assessing and understanding the performance of
multi-objective algorithms in software model refactoring is
of paramount importance, especially when the goal is to
integrate them into the design and evolution phases of software
development.
In this paper, we present open challenges that, to the best of
our knowledge, hinder the exploitation of search-based tech-
niques within the context of quality attribute optimization of
software architectures. We also describe the plan to overcome
some of the listed open challenges.

Abstract—The estimation and improvement of quality at-
tributes in software architectures is a challenging and time-
consuming activity. On modern software applications, a model-
based representation is crucial to face the complexity of such
activity. One main challenge is that the improvement of distinctive
quality attributes may require contrasting refactoring actions
on the architecture, for instance when looking for trade-off
between performance and reliability (or other non-functional
quality attributes). In such cases, multi-objective optimization can
provide the designer with a more complete view on these trade-
offs and, consequently, can lead to identify suitable refactoring
actions that take into account independent or even competing
objectives.
In this paper, we present open challenges and research direc-
tions to ﬁll current gaps in the context of multi-objective software
architecture optimization.
Index Terms—refactoring, multi-objective optimization, soft-
ware architecture, performance

arXiv:2301.07516v1 [cs.SE] 18 Jan 2023

II. STATE OF THE ART

In the past ten years, approaches on software architecture
multi-objective optimization have been developed to optimize
various quality attributes (such as reliability and energy) [9, 10,
11, 12, 6]; with various degrees of freedom in the modiﬁcation
of architectures (such as service selection [13].
Recent research analyzes the capacity of two distinct multi-
objective optimization algorithms to enhance non-functional
features inside a particular architecture notation (i.e., Palladio
Component Model) [7, 14, 15]. The authors use architectural
approaches to ﬁnd the best solutions, which primarily include
changing system parameters (such as hardware settings or
operation requirements).
Menasce et al. have provided a framework for architectural
design and quality optimization, [16]. This framework makes
use of architectural patterns to help the search process (such
as load balancing and fault tolerance). The approach has two
drawbacks: performance indices are computed using equation-
based analytical models, which may be too simple to capture
architectural details and resource contention; the architecture
must be designed in a tool-speciﬁc notation rather than in a
standard modeling language (as we do in this paper).
A method for modeling and analyzing AADL architectures
has been given by Aleti et al. [17]. A tool that may be
used to optimize various quality attributes while adjusting
architecture deployment and component redundancy has also
been introduced.
Cortellessa and Di Pompeo [6] have presented a multi-
objective framework aimed at improving the quality of archi-
tectural models speciﬁed by Æmilia [18]. Cortellessa and Di

I. INTRODUCTION
Different factors, such as the addition of new requirements,
the adaption to new execution contexts, or the deterioration
of non-functional attributes, can lead to software refactoring.
Identifying the best refactoring operations is challenging be-
cause there is a wide range of potential solutions and no
automated assistance is currently available. In this situation,
search-based approaches have been widely used [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Multi-objective optimization approaches, which are search-
based, have lately been used to solve model refactoring
optimization issues [6, 7]. Searching among design alternatives
(for example, through architectural tactics) is a typical feature
of multi-objective optimization methodologies used to solve
model-based software restructuring challenges [8, 7].
The automated refactoring of software models plays an
important role in optimizing software architectures, as it
allows generating design alternatives while preserving the
external behavior of its functionalities. While being beneﬁcial
in ﬁnding such alternatives, the automated refactoring pro-
cess can generate a considerable number of new solutions
that are difﬁcult for the designer to navigate. As a result,
choosing the best refactoring methods from such a huge set
of options requires signiﬁcant effort, which can be reduced
by multi-objective algorithms. However, in order to explore
the solution space and produce an (almost) optimal Pareto
frontier, multi-objective algorithms may require a signiﬁcant
amount of hardware resources (such as time and memory

Bio-Inspired Actions

Architecture Alternatives

IV. OPEN CHALLENGES

Lack of automation: As introduced before, when search-
based techniques are put in place they require to generate a
higher number of alternatives, even thousands. Therefore, the
automation to form alternatives is a must-have functionality
in every model-based optimization framework. Introducing
automation in such a context would be a step ahead towards
the adoption of search-based techniques within model-based
optimization processes. Furthermore, the automation is strictly
related to the modelling notation and its expressiveness. To
the best of our knowledge, we introduced the ﬁrst refactor-
ing engine for UML [20]. Our refactoring engine exploits
the Epsilon suite 1, and provides some facilities to refactor
three different UML views, i.e., Component, Sequence, and
Deployment diagrams. Then, we exploited the refactoring
engine in a search-based optimization framework, where we
sought optimal solutions with respect to four competitive
objectives [19, 21].
Problem formalization: One of the relevant aspects for
applying search-based techniques is the formalization of the
problem. Often, search-based approaches exploit evolutionary
algorithms and, in the majority of the cases, genetic algorithms
are used to search the solution space. Furthermore, a genetic
algorithm is a bio-inspired algorithm that requires a chromo-
some to be manipulated for the evolution of the species.
To the best of our knowledge, there not exist guidelines
in literature to represent speciﬁc problems as chromosomes.
Positional structures are exploited to draw problems in model-
based optimization studies [8, 7]. Thus, each position of the
chromosome have a ﬁxed meaning. One of the advantages
of using positional chromosomes is their fastest execution of
bio-inspired actions on them. However, the positional structure
has the drawback to be too inexpressive within the context
of model-based software refactoring. To overcome the above
limitation, there exists a chromosome representation that re-
ports a refactoring action into a chromosome position [20].
Nevertheless, it is slower than the positional structure due
to the complexity of compatibility checking among elements
within chromosomes.
For the above issues, we see an interesting research direction
of the problem formalization within model-based software
optimization that should ﬁll the gap with more established
search-based optimization problems.
Time and resources requirements: Improving quality at-
tributes by means of optimization techniques often requires
a considerable amount of time and resources, as the search
for better solutions relies on the manipulation of modelling
artifacts. Usually, the process of generating a new design alter-
native also involves a number of transformations from software

Objectives

[are the stopping criteria

met?]

...

Fig. 1.
A typical framework for quality attributes optimization of software
architecture.

Pompeo analyzed the sensibility of genetic algorithms when
changing the conﬁguration parameters.
Cortellessa et al. [19] have instead studied the impact
of speciﬁc non-functional quality metric (i.e., performance
antipatterns [20]) on the overall quality of Pareto frontiers. In
order to evaluate the overall quality of Pareto frontiers in this
study, Cortellessa et al. exploited established quality indicators
within the search-based theory.
Di Pompeo and Tucci [21] have investigated the effect of in-
troducing a time budget to multi-objective optimization driven
by non-functional quality attributes (such as performance and
reliability) on the overall Pareto frontiers quality. The idea
beyond the approach is to introduce concepts of search-based
techniques already investigated within different domains to the
software model optimization context.

III. QUALITY ATTRIBUTE OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK

Figure 1 depicts a classic search-based framework based
on genetic algorithms. The framework starts from an Initial
Architecture and a set of Refactoring Actions. The initial
architecture is the subject architecture to be optimized, while
the refactoring actions are the set of all available actions that
are combined by the Bio-Inspired Actions, which are selection,
mutation, and crossover.
The crossover operator mates solutions to evolve the species.
Several crossover policies, such as the single point crossover,
can be employed in this step. In this case, the chromosome
will be split in two halves, and they will be alternatively
combined. While the crossover operation is performed, the
mutation operator randomly selects an element belonging to
the chromosome and change it with a new one, as a genetic
mutation would do in nature. The selection operator is in
charge of discarding the worst elements in the offspring (i.e.,
the architecture alternatives). Once the offspring is made,
elements belonging to the offspring are sorted with respect
to the objectives (i.e., through the sorting operator). When
there are more than one objective, we are in a multi-objective

1

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we reported open challenges of quality at-
tributes optimization of software architectures. To the best of
our knowledge, these open challenges hinder the utilization of
search-based techniques in software architecture optimization.
Furthermore, our agenda foster new research activities in the
ﬁeld of software architecture optimization, especially for the
optimization of non-functional properties, such as performance
and reliability.
As short-term future work, we will try to tackle the chal-
lenge about the lack of automation. We already presented
approaches targeted at this challenge [19, 18]. However, we
plan on extending the introduced automation by supporting
more refactoring actions, for example by implementing the
Fowler’s refactoring portfolio [22].
As mid-term future work, we will attempt to address the
challenge about the architectural quality metrics. We plan to
exploit quality estimation techniques well-recognized in the
search-based community [23].
As long-term future work, we will attempt to address the
challenge about the problem formalization. To empirically
address this challenge, a profound analysis of several software
architectures is probably required, and each one will generate
a speciﬁc optimization problem.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Daniele Di Pompeo is supported by the Centre of EXcel-
lence on Connected, Geo-Localized and Cybersecure Vehicle
(EX-Emerge), funded by the Italian Government under CIPE
resolution n. 70/2017 (Aug. 7, 2017).

REFERENCES

[1] T. Mariani and S. R. Vergilio, “A systematic review on
search-based refactoring,” InfSoft, vol. 83, pp. 14–34,
Mar. 2017.
[2] A. Ouni, M. Kessentini, K. Inoue, and M. ´O Cinn´eide,
“Search-Based Web Service Antipatterns Detection,”
TSC, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 603–617, 2017.
[3] A. Ram´ırez, J. R. Romero, and S. Ventura, “A survey
of many-objective optimisation in search-based software
engineering,” JSS, vol. 149, pp. 382–395, 2019.
[4] M. Ray and D. P. Mohapatra, “Multi-objective test
prioritization via a genetic algorithm,” Innov. Syst. Softw.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 261–270, 2014. [Online].
Available:
[5] A.
Aleti,
B.
Buhnova,
L.
Grunske,
A.
Koziolek,
and I. Meedeniya, “Software architecture optimization
methods: A systematic literature review,” IEEE Trans.
Software Eng., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 658–683, 2013.
[Online]. Available:
[6] V. Cortellessa and D. Di Pompeo, “Analyzing the sensi-
tivity of multi-objective software architecture refactoring
to conﬁguration characteristics,” InfSoft, vol. 135, p.
106568, 2021.
[7] Y. Ni, X. Du, P. Ye, L. L. Minku, X. Yao, M. Harman, and
R. Xiao, “Multi-objective software performance optimi-
sation at the architecture level using randomised search
rules,” InfSoft, vol. 135, p. 106565, 2021.
[8] A.
Koziolek,
H.
Koziolek,
and
R.
H.
Reussner,
“Peropteryx: automated application of tactics in multi-
objective software architecture optimization,” in 7th
International Conference on the Quality of Software
Architectures, QoSA 2011, I. Crnkovic, J. A. Stafford,
D.
C.
Petriu,
J.
Happe,
and
P.
Inverardi,
Eds.
ACM, 2011, pp. 33–42. [Online]. Available:
//doi.org/10.1145/2000259.2000267
[9] A. Martens, H. Koziolek, S. Becker, and R. H. Reussner,
“Automatically improve software architecture models for
performance, reliability, and cost using evolutionary al-
gorithms,” in ICPE.
New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press, 2010, pp. 105–116.
[10] R. Li, R. Etemaadi, M. T. M. Emmerich, and M. R. V.
Chaudron, “An evolutionary multiobjective optimization
approach to component-based software architecture de-
sign,” in CEC.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 432–439.
[11] I. Meedeniya, B. Buhnova, A. Aleti, and L. Grunske,
“Architecture-Driven Reliability and Energy Optimiza-
tion
for
Complex
Embedded
Systems,”
in
QoSA.
Springer, 2010, pp. 52–67.
[12] A. Martens, D. Ardagna, H. Koziolek, R. Mirandola, and
R. H. Reussner, “A Hybrid Approach for Multi-attribute
QoS Optimisation in Component Based Software Sys-