Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea, Henry Gilbert,
Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C. Schmidt
Department of Computer Science
Vanderbilt University, Tennessee
Nashville, TN, USA
{jules.white, quchen.fu, george.s.hays, michael.sandborn, carlos.olea, henry.gilbert,
ashraf.elnashar, jesse.spencer-smith,

Abstract—Prompt engineering is an increasingly important
skill set needed to converse effectively with large language models
(LLMs), such as ChatGPT. Prompts are instructions given to an
LLM to enforce rules, automate processes, and ensure speciﬁc
qualities (and quantities) of generated output. Prompts are also
a form of programming that can customize the outputs and
interactions with an LLM.
This paper describes a catalog of prompt engineering tech-
niques presented in pattern form that have been applied to solve
common problems when conversing with LLMs. Prompt patterns
are a knowledge transfer method analogous to software patterns
since they provide reusable solutions to common problems faced
in a particular context, i.e., output generation and interaction
when working with LLMs.
This paper provides the following contributions to research on
prompt engineering that apply LLMs to automate software de-
velopment tasks. First, it provides a framework for documenting
patterns for structuring prompts to solve a range of problems
so that they can be adapted to different domains. Second, it
presents a catalog of patterns that have been applied successfully
to improve the outputs of LLM conversations. Third, it explains
how prompts can be built from multiple patterns and illustrates
prompt patterns that beneﬁt from combination with other prompt
patterns.
Index Terms—large language models, prompt patterns, prompt
engineering

LLM by providing speciﬁc rules and guidelines for an LLM
conversation with a set of initial rules. In particular, a prompt
sets the context for the conversation and tells the LLM what
information is important and what the desired output form and
content should be.
For example, a prompt could specify that an LLM should
only generate code that follows a certain coding style or
programming paradigm. Likewise, it could specify that an
LLM should ﬂag certain keywords or phrases in a generated
document and provide additional information related to those
keywords. By introducing these guidelines, prompts facilitate
more structured and nuanced outputs to aid a large variety of
software engineering tasks in the context of LLMs.
Prompt engineering is the means by which LLMs are
programmed via prompts. To demonstrate the power of
prompt engineering, we provide the following prompt:
Prompt: “From now on, I would like you to ask me
questions to deploy a Python application to AWS.
When you have enough information to deploy the
application, create a Python script to automate the
deployment.”
This example prompt causes ChatGPT to begin asking the
user questions about their software application. ChatGPT will
drive the question-asking process until it reaches a point where
it has sufﬁcient information to generate a Python script that
automates deployment. This example demonstrates the pro-
gramming potential of prompts beyond conventional “generate
a method that does X” style prompts or “answer this quiz
question”.
Moreover, prompts can be engineered to program an LLM
to accomplish much more than simply dictating the output type
or ﬁltering the information provided to the model. With the
right prompt, it is possible to create entirely new interaction
paradigms, such as having an LLM generate and give a quiz
associated with a software engineering concept or tool, or
even simulate a Linux terminal window. Moreover, prompts
have the potential for self-adaptation, suggesting other prompts
to gather additional information or generate related artifacts.
These advanced capabilities of prompts highlight the impor-
tance of engineering them to provide value beyond simple text
or code generation.
Prompt patterns are essential to effective prompt engi-
neering. A key contribution of this paper is the introduction
of prompt patterns to document successful approaches for

arXiv:2302.11382v1 [cs.SE] 21 Feb 2023

I. INTRODUCTION

Conversational large language models (LLMs) [1], such as
ChatGPT [2], have generated immense interest in a range
of domains for tasks ranging from answering questions on
medical licensing exams [3] to generating code snippets. This
paper focuses on enhancing the application of LLMs in several
domains, such as helping developers code effectively and
efﬁciently with unfamiliar APIs or allowing students to acquire
new coding skills and techniques.
LLMs are particularly promising in domains where humans
and AI tools work together as trustworthy collaborators to
more rapidly and reliably evolve software-reliant systems [4].
For example, LLMs are being integrated directly into software
tools, such as Github’s Co-Pilot [5]–[7] and included in inte-
grated development environments (IDEs), such as IntelliJ [8]
and Visual Studio Code, thereby allowing software teams to
access these tools directly from their preferred IDE.
A prompt [9] is a set of instructions provided to an
LLM that programs the LLM by customizing it and/or en-
hancing or reﬁning its capabilities. A prompt can inﬂuence
subsequent interactions with—and output generated from—an

• A name and classiﬁcation. Each pattern has a name that
identiﬁes the pattern and should be used consistently. A
classiﬁcation groups patterns into broad categories, such
as creational, structural, or behavioral.

• The intent concisely conveys the purpose the pattern is
intended to achieve.

• The motivation documents the underlying problem the
pattern is meant to solve and the importance of the
problem.

• The structure and participants. The structure describes
the different pattern participants (such as classes and
objects) and how they collaborate to form a generalized
solution.

• Example code concretely maps the pattern to some
underlying programming language(s) and aids developers
in gaining greater insight into how that pattern can be
applied effectively.

II. COMPARING SOFTWARE PATTERNS

WITH PROMPT PATTERNS

The quality of the output(s) generated by a conversational
LLM is directly related to the quality of the prompts provided
by the user. As discussed in Section I, the prompts given to
a conversational LLM can be used to program interactions
between a user and an LLM to better solve a variety of
problems. One contribution of this paper is the framework it
provides to document patterns that structure prompts to solve
a range of software tasks that can be adapted to different
domains.
This framework is useful since it focuses on codifying
patterns that can be applied to help users better interact
with conversational LLMs in a variety of contexts, rather
than simply discussing interesting examples or domain-speciﬁc
prompts. Codifying this knowledge in pattern form enhances
reuse and transferability to other contexts and domains where
users face similar—but not identical—problems.
The topic of knowledge transfer has been studied exten-
sively in the software patterns literature [10], [11] at multiple
levels, e.g., design, architectural, and analysis. This paper
applies a variant of a familiar pattern form as the basis of
our prompt engineering approach. Since prompts are a form
of programming, it is natural to document them in pattern
form.

• Consequences summarize the pros and cons of applying
the pattern in practice.

B. Overview of Prompt Patterns
Prompt patterns are similar to software patterns in that they
offer reusable solutions to speciﬁc problems. They focus more
speciﬁcally, however, on the context of output generation from
large-scale language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT. Just
as software patterns provide a codiﬁed approach to solving
common software development challenges, prompt patterns
provide a codiﬁed approach to customizing the output and
interactions of LLMs.
By documenting and leveraging prompt patterns in the
context of automating software development tasks, individual
users and teams can enforce constraints on the generated
output, ensure that relevant information is included, and
change the format of interaction with the LLM to better
solve problems they face. Prompt patterns can be viewed as a
corollary to the broad corpus of general software patterns, just
adapted to the more speciﬁc context of LLM output generation.
Prompt patterns follow a similar format to classic software
patterns, with slight modiﬁcations to match the context of
output generation with LLMs.1 Each of the analogous sections
for the prompt pattern form used in this paper is summarized
below:

A. Overview of Software Patterns

• A name and classiﬁcation. The prompt pattern name
uniquely identiﬁes the pattern and ideally indicates the
problem that is being addressed. For the classiﬁcation,
we have developed a series of initial categories of pattern
types, which are summarized in Table I and include
Output Customization, Error Identiﬁcation, Prompt
Improvement, Interaction, and Context Control.

A software pattern provides a reusable solution to a recur-
ring problem within a particular context [10]. Documenting
software patterns concisely conveys (and generalizes) from
speciﬁc problems being addressed to identify important forces
and/or requirements that should be resolved and/or addressed
in successful solutions.
A pattern form also includes guidance on how to implement
the pattern, as well as information on the trade-offs and
considerations to take into account when implementing a
pattern. Moreover, example applications of the pattern are
often provided to further showcase the pattern’s utility in
practice. Software patterns are typically documented in a

• The intent and context describes the problem the prompt
pattern solves and the goals it achieves. The problem

1The most direct translation of software pattern structure to prompt patterns
is the naming, intent, motivation, and sample code. The structure and
classiﬁcation, however, although named similarly, require more adaptation.

• It is possible to program an LLM to introduce novel
semantics for statements and words that create new ways
for communicating an idea. In contrast, grammars may
not easily represent ideas that can be expressed through
completely new symbology or languages that the gram-
mar designer was not aware of.

• The motivation provides the rationale for the problem
and explains why solving it is important. The motivation
is explained in the context of users interacting with a
conversational LLM and how it can improve upon users
informally prompting the LLM in one or more circum-
stances. Speciﬁc circumstances where the improvements
are expected are documented.

D. A Way Forward: Fundamental Contextual Statements

An open research question, therefore, is what approach is
more effective than formal grammars for describing prompt
pattern structure and ideas. We propose the concept of funda-
mental contextual statements, which are written descriptions
of the important ideas to communicate in a prompt to an LLM.
An idea can be rewritten and expressed in arbitrary ways based
on user needs and experience. The key ideas to communicate,
however, are presented to the user as a series of simple, but
fundamental, statements.
One beneﬁt of adopting and applying the fundamental con-
textual statements approach is that it is intentionally intuitive
to users. In particular, we expect users will understand how to
express and adapt the statements in a contextually appropriate
way for their domain. Moreover, since the underlying ideas of
the prompt are captured, these same ideas can be expressed
by the user in alternate symbology or wording that has been
introduced to the LLM using patterns, such as the Meta
Language Creation pattern presented in Section III-B.
Our ultimate goal is to enhance prompt engineering by
providing a framework for designing prompts that can be
reused and/or adapted to other LLMs in the same way that
software patterns can be implemented in different program-
ming languages and platforms. For the purposes of this paper,
however, all prompts were tested with ChatGPT [12] using the
ChatGPT+ service. We use ChatGPT as the LLM for all exam-
ples presented in this paper due to its widespread availability
and popularity. These examples were documented through a
combination of exploring the corpus of community-posted
prompts on the Internet and independent prompt creation from
our use of ChatGPT to automating software development
tasks.

• The structure and key ideas. The structure describes
the fundamental contextual information, as a series of
key ideas, that the prompt pattern provides to the LLM.
These ideas are similar to “participants” in a software pat-
tern. The contextual information may be communicated
through varying wording (just as a software pattern can
have variations in how it is realized in code), but should
have fundamental pieces of information that form a core
element of the pattern.

• Example implementation demonstrates how the prompt
pattern is worded in practice.

• Consequences summarize the pros and cons of applying
the pattern and may provide guidance on how to adapt
the prompt to different contexts.

C. Evaluating Means for Deﬁning a Prompt Pattern’s Struc-
ture and Ideas

In software patterns, the structure and participants are
normally deﬁned in terms of UML diagrams, such as structure
diagrams and/or interaction diagrams. These UML diagrams
explain what the participants of the pattern are and how they
interact to solve the problem. In prompt patterns, something
analogous is needed, though UML may not be an appro-
priate structural documentation approach since it is intended
to describe software structures, as opposed to the ideas to
communicate in a prompt.
Several possible approaches could be used, ranging from di-
agrams to deﬁning grammars for a prompt language. Although
grammars may seem attractive due to their formal nature, they
also incur the following challenges:

• The goal of prompts is to communicate knowledge in a
clear and concise way to conversation LLM users, who
may or may not be computer scientists or programmers.
As a community, we should strive to create an approach-
able format that communicates knowledge clearly to a
diverse target audience.

III. A CATALOG OF PROMPT PATTERNS

FOR CONVERSATIONAL LLMS

This section presents our catalog of prompt patterns that
have been applied to solve common problems in the domain
of conversational LLM interaction and output generation for
automating software tasks. Each prompt pattern is accompa-
nied by concrete implementation samples and examples with
and without the prompt.

• It is possible to phrase a prompt in many different ways.
It is hard, however, to deﬁne a grammar that accurately
and completely expresses all the nuanced ways that
components of a prompt could be expressed in text or
symbols.

A. Summary of the Prompt Pattern Catalog

• Prompts fundamentally convey ideas to a conversational
LLM and are not simply the production of tokens for
input. In particular, an idea built into a prompt pattern
can be communicated in many ways and its expression

The classiﬁcation of prompt patterns is an important consid-
eration in documenting the patterns. Table I outlines the initial
classiﬁcations for the catalog of prompt patterns we identiﬁed
in our work with ChatGPT thus far.

Pattern Category
Prompt Pattern
Input Semantics
Meta Language Creation
Output
Output Automater
Customization
Persona
Visualization Generator
Recipe
Template
Error Identiﬁcation Fact Check List

Reﬂection
Prompt
Question Reﬁnement
Improvement
Alternative Approaches
Cognitive Veriﬁer
Refusal Breaker
Interaction
Flipped Interaction
Game Play
Inﬁnite Generation
Context Control
Context Manager

As shown in this table, there are ﬁve categories of prompt
patterns in our classiﬁcation framework: Input Semantics,
Output Customization, Error Identiﬁcation, Prompt Im-
provement, and Interaction, each of which is summarized
below.
The Input Semantics category deals with how an LLM
understands the input and how it translates the input into
something it can use to generate output. This category in-
cludes the Meta Language Creation pattern, which focuses on
creating a custom language for the LLM to understand. This
pattern is useful when the default input language is ill-suited
for expressing ideas the user wants to convey to the LLM.
The Output Customization category focuses on constrain-
ing or tailoring the types, formats, structure, or other properties
of the output generated by the LLM. The prompt patterns in
this category include Output Automater, Persona, Visualiza-
tion Generator, Recipe, and Template patterns. The Output
Automater pattern allows the user to create scripts that can
automate any tasks the LLM output suggests the user should
perform. The Persona pattern gives the LLM a persona or role
to play when generating output. The Visualization Generator
pattern allows the user to generate visualizations by producing
textual outputs that can be fed to other tools, such as other
AI-based image generators, like DALL-E [13]. The Recipe
pattern allows the user to obtain a sequence of steps or actions
to realize a stated end result, possibly with partially known
information or constraints. The Template pattern allows the
user to specify a template for the output, which the LLM ﬁlls
in with content.
The Error Identiﬁcation category focuses on identifying
and resolving errors in the output generated by the LLM. This

B. The Meta Language Creation Pattern

1) Intent and Context: During a conversation with an LLM,
the user would like to create the prompt via an alternate
language, such as a textual short-hand notation for graphs, a
description of states and state transitions for a state machine, a
set of commands for prompt automation, etc. The intent of this
pattern is to explain the semantics of this alternative language
to the LLM so the user can write future prompts using this
new language and its semantics.
2) Motivation: Many problems, structures, or other ideas
communicated in a prompt may be more concisely, unam-
biguously, or clearly expressed in a language other than
English (or whatever conventional human language is used
to interact with an LLM). To produce output based on an
alternative language, however, an LLM needs to understand
the language’s semantics.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
When I say X, I mean Y (or would like you to do Y)

“From now on, whenever I type two identiﬁers
separated by a “→”, I am describing a graph. For
example, “a →b” is describing a graph with nodes
“a” and “b” and an edge between them. If I separate
identiﬁers by “-[w:2, z:3]→”, I am adding properties
of the edge, such as a weight or label.”

This example of the Meta Language Creation pattern estab-
lishes a standardized notation for describing graphs by deﬁning
a convention for representing nodes and edges. Whenever the
author types two identiﬁers separated by a “→” symbol, it is
an indication that a graph is being described. For example, if
the author types “a →b”, this indicates that a graph is being
deﬁned with nodes “a” and “b”, and that there is an edge
between them. This convention provides a clear and concise
way to communicate the structure of a graph in written form.
Moreover, the prompt goes on to specify that additional
information about the edges, such as a weight or label, can
be provided using the syntax “-[w:2, z:3]→”. This notation
allows for the speciﬁcation of additional properties beyond
the basic structure of the graph. The speciﬁed properties are
associated with the edge between the two nodes and can
provide important context for the interpretation of the graph.
This standardized notation for describing graphs can make it
easier to communicate graph structures and properties, which
may not be easy or are very verbose to describe as a series of
sentences.
5) Consequences: Although this pattern provides a pow-
erful means to customize a user’s interaction with an LLM,
it may create the potential for confusion within the LLM.
As important as it is to clearly deﬁne the semantics of the
language, it is also essential to ensure the language itself
introduces no ambiguities that degrade the LLM’s performance
or accuracy. For example, the prompt “whenever I separate
two things by commas, it means that the ﬁrst thing precedes
the second thing” will likely create signiﬁcant potential for
ambiguity and create the potential for unexpected semantics
if punctuation involving commas is used in the prompt.
To showcase the potential for confusion, ChatGPT will
warn the user and potentially be unable to perform a speciﬁc
mapping of a symbol or term to a new meaning. For example,
if following prompt is given to ChatGPT

C. The Output Automater Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to have
the LLM generate a script or other automation artifact that can
automatically perform any steps it recommends taking as part
of its output. The goal is to reduce the manual effort needed
to implement any LLM output recommendations.
2) Motivation: The output of an LLM is often a sequence
of steps for the user to follow. For example, when asking an
LLM to generate a Python conﬁguration script it may suggest
a number of ﬁles to modify and changes to apply to each ﬁle.
However, having users continually perform the manual steps
dictated by LLM output is tedious and error-prone.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
Whenever you produce an output that has at least one
step to take and the following properties (alternatively,
always do this)
Produce an executable artifact of type X that will
automate these steps

The ﬁrst part of the pattern identiﬁes the situations under
which automation should be generated. A simple approach
is to state that the output includes at least two steps to
take and that an automation artifact should be produced. The

“Whenever I say “a”, I am referring to Marie An-
toinette.”

D. The Flipped Interaction Pattern

1) Intent and Context: You want the LLM to ask questions
to obtain the information it needs to perform some tasks.
Rather than the user driving the conversation, therefore, you
want the LLM to drive the conversation to focus it on
achieving a speciﬁc goal. For example, you may want the
LLM to give you a quick quiz or automatically ask questions
until it has sufﬁcient information to generate a deployment
script for your application to a particular cloud environment.
2) Motivation: Rather than having the user drives a con-
versation, an LLM often has knowledge it can use to more
accurately obtain information from the user. The goal of the
Flipped Interaction pattern is to ﬂip the interaction ﬂow so the
LLM asks the user questions to achieve some desired goal. The
LLM can often better select the format, number, and content
of the interactions to ensure that the goal is reached faster,
more accurately, and/or by using knowledge the user may not
(initially) possess.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
I would like you to ask me questions to achieve X
You should ask questions until this condition is met or
to achieve this goal (alternatively, forever)
(Optional) ask me the questions one at a time, two at
a time, etc.

A prompt for a ﬂipped interaction should always specify the
goal of the interaction. The ﬁrst idea (i.e., you want the LLM to
ask questions to achieve a goal) communicates this goal to the
LLM. Equally important is that the questions should focus on a
particular topic or outcome. By providing the goal, the LLM
can understand what it is trying to accomplish through the
interaction and tailor its questions accordingly. This “inversion

E. The Persona Pattern

1) Intent and Context: In many cases, users would like
LLM output to always take a certain point of view or per-
spective. For example, it may be useful for to conduct a code
review as if the LLM was a security expert. The intent of this
pattern is to give the LLM a “persona” that helps it select what
types of output to generate and what details to focus on.
2) Motivation: Users may not know what types of outputs
or details are important for an LLM to focus on to achieve
a given task. They may know, however, the role or type of
person that they would normally ask to get help with these
things. The Persona pattern enables the users to express what
they need help with without knowing the exact details of the
outputs they need.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

“From now on, I would like you to ask me questions
to deploy a Python application to AWS. When you
have enough information to deploy the application,
create a Python script to automate the deployment.”

In general, the more speciﬁc the prompt regarding the
constraints and information to collect, the better the outcome.
For instance, the example prompt above could provide a menu
of possible AWS services (such as Lambda, EC2, etc.) with
which to deploy the application. In other cases, the LLM may
be permitted to simply make appropriate choices on its own for
things that the user doesn’t explicitly make decisions about.
One limitation of this prompt is that, once other contextual
information is provided regarding the task, it may require
experimentation with the precise phrasing to get the LLM to
ask the questions in the appropriate number and ﬂow to best
suit the task, such as asking multiple questions at once versus
one question at a time.
5) Consequences: One consideration when designing the
prompt is how much to dictate to the LLM regarding what
information to collect prior to termination. In the example
above, the ﬂipped interaction is open-ended and can vary sig-
niﬁcantly in the ﬁnal generated artifact. This open-endedness
makes the prompt generic and reusable, but may potentially
ask additional questions that could be skipped if more context
is given.
If speciﬁc requirements are known in advance, it is better to
inject them into the prompt rather than hoping the LLM will
obtain the needed information. Otherwise, the LLM will non-
nondeterministically decide whether to prompt the user for the
information or make an educated guess as to an appropriate
value.

Contextual Statements
Act as persona X
Provide outputs that persona X would create

The ﬁrst statement conveys the idea that the LLM needs
to act as a speciﬁc persona and provide outputs that such a
persona would. This persona can be expressed in a number
of ways, ranging from a job description, title, ﬁctional char-
acter, historical ﬁgure, etc. The persona should elicit a set
of attributes associated with a well-known job title, type of
person, etc.2

The secondary idea—provide outputs that persona X would
create—offers opportunities for customization. For example, a
teacher might provide a large variety of different output types,
ranging from assignments to reading lists to lectures. If a more
speciﬁc scope to the type of output is known, the user can
provide it in this statement.

2Be aware, however, that personas relating to living people or people
considered harmful make be disregarded due to underlying LLM privacy and
security rules.

F. The Question Reﬁnement Pattern

1) Intent and Context: This pattern engages the LLM in
the prompt engineering process. The intent of this pattern is
to ensure the conversational LLM always suggests potentially
better or more reﬁned questions the user could ask instead of
their original question. Using this pattern, the LLM can aid the
user in ﬁnding the right question to ask in order to arrive at an
accurate answer. In addition, the LLM may help the user ﬁnd
the information or achieve their goal in fewer interactions with
the user than if the user employed trial and error prompting.
2) Motivation: If a user is asking a question, it is possible
they are not an expert in the domain and may not know the
best way to phrase the question or be aware of additional
information helpful in phrasing the question. LLMs will often
state limitations on the answer they are providing or request
additional information to help them produce a more accurate
answer. An LLM may also state assumptions it made in
providing the answer. The motivation is that this additional
information or set of assumptions could be used to generate
a better prompt. Rather than requiring the user to digest
and rephrase their prompt with the additional information,
the LLM can directly reﬁne the prompt to incorporate the
additional information.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
Within scope X, suggest a better version of the question
to use instead
(Optional) prompt me if I would like to use the better
version instead

The ﬁrst contextual statement in the prompt is asking the
LLM to suggest a better version of a question within a speciﬁc
scope. The scope is provided to ensure that not all questions
are automatically reworded or that they are reﬁned with a
given goal. The second contextual statement is meant for
automation and allows the user to automatically use the reﬁned
question without having to copy/paste or manually enter it. The
engineering of this prompt can be further reﬁned by combining
it with the Reﬂection pattern, which allows the LLM to explain
why it believes the reﬁned question is an improvement.
4) Example Implementation:
“From now on, whenever I ask a question about a
software artifact’s security, suggest a better version
of the question to use that incorporates information
speciﬁc to security risks in the language or frame-
work that I am using instead and ask me if I would
like to use your question instead.”
In the context of the example above, the LLM will use
the Question Reﬁnement pattern to improve security-related
questions by asking for or using speciﬁc details about the

G. The Alternative Approaches Pattern
1) Intent and Context: The intent of the pattern is to ensure
an LLM always offers alternative ways of accomplishing a task
so a user does not pursue only the approaches with which they
are familiar. The LLM can provide alternative approaches that
always force the user to think about what they are doing and
determine if that is the best approach to meet reach their goal.
In addition, solving the task may inform the user or teach them
about alternative concepts for subsequent follow-up.
2) Motivation: Humans often suffer from cognitive biases
that lead them to choose a particular approach to solve a
problem even when it is not the right or “best” approach.
Moreover, humans may be unaware of alternative approaches
to what they have used in the past. The motivation of the
Alternative Approaches pattern is to ensure the user is aware
of alternative approaches to select a better approach to solve
a problem by dissolving their cognitive biases.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
Within scope X, if there are alternative ways to accom-
plish the same thing, list the best alternate approaches
(Optional) compare/contrast the pros and cons of each
approach
(Optional) include the original way that I asked
(Optional) prompt me for which approach I would like
to use

The ﬁrst statement, “within scope X”, scopes the interaction
to a particular goal, topic, or bounds on the questioning. The
scope is the constraints that the user is placing on the alter-
native approaches. The scope could be “for implementation
decisions” or “for the deployment of the application”. The
scope ensures that any alternatives ﬁt within the boundaries
or constraints that the user must adhere to.
The second statement, “if there are alternative ways to
accomplish the same thing, list the best alternate approaches”

• Humans may initially ask questions that are too high-
level to provide a concrete answer to without additional
follow-up due to unfamiliarity with the domain, laziness
in prompt entry, or being unsure about what the correct
phrasing of the question should be.

• Research has demonstrated that LLMs can often perform
better when using a question that is subdivided into
individual questions.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
When you are asked a question, follow these rules
Generate a number of additional questions that would
help more accurately answer the question
Combine the answers to the individual questions to
produce the ﬁnal answer to the overall question

The ﬁrst statement is to generate a number of additional
questions that would help more accurately answer the original
question. This step instructs the LLM to consider the context
of the question and to identify any information that may be
missing or unclear. By generating additional questions, the
LLM can help to ensure that the ﬁnal answer is as complete
and accurate as possible. This step also encourages critical
thinking by the user and can help to uncover new insights or
approaches that may not have been considered initially, which
subsequently lead to better follow-on questions.
The second statement is to combine the answers to the
individual questions to produce the ﬁnal answer to the overall
question. This step is designed to ensure that all of the infor-
mation gathered from the individual questions is incorporated
into the ﬁnal answer. By combining the answers, the LLM
can provide a more comprehensive and accurate response to
the original question. This step also helps to ensure that all
relevant information is taken into account and that the ﬁnal
answer is not based on any single answer.
4) Example Implementation:
“When I ask you a question, generate three addi-
tional questions that would help you give a more
accurate answer. When I have answered the three
questions, combine the answers to produce the ﬁnal
answers to my original question.”
This speciﬁc instance of the prompt pattern adds a reﬁne-
ment to the original pattern by specifying a set number of
additional questions that the LLM should generate in response
to a question. In this case, the prompt speciﬁes that ChatGPT
should generate three additional questions that would help to
give a more accurate answer to the original question. The
speciﬁc number can be based on the user’s experience and
willingness to provide follow-up information. A reﬁnement
to the prompt can be to provide a context for the amount

H. The Cognitive Veriﬁer Pattern

1) Intent and Context: Research literature has documented
that LLMs can often reason better if a question is subdivided
into additional questions that provide answers combined into
the overall answer to the original question [14]. The intent of
the pattern is to force the LLM to always subdivide questions

“When I ask you a question, generate three addi-
tional questions that would help you give a more
accurate answer. Assume that I know little about
the topic that we are discussing and please deﬁne
any terms that are not general knowledge. When
I have answered the three questions, combine the
answers to produce the ﬁnal answers to my original
question.”

One point of variation in this pattern is where the facts are
output. Given that the facts may be terms that the user is not
familiar with, it is preferable if the list of facts comes after
the output. This after-output presentation ordering allows the
user to read and understand the statements before seeing what
statements should be checked. The user may also determine
additional facts prior to realizing the fact list at the end should
be checked.
4) Example Implementation: A sample wording of the Fact
Check List pattern is shown below:

The reﬁnement also speciﬁes that the user may not have
a strong understanding of the topic being discussed, which
means that the LLM should deﬁne any terms that are not
general knowledge. This helps to ensure that the follow-up
questions are not only relevant and focused, but also accessible
to the user, who may not be familiar with technical or domain-
speciﬁc terms. By providing clear and concise deﬁnitions, the
LLM can help to ensure that the follow-up questions are easy
to understand and that the ﬁnal answer is accessible to users
with varying levels of knowledge and expertise.

“From now on, when you generate an answer, create
a set of facts that the answer depends on that should
be fact-checked and list this set of facts at the
end of your output. Only include facts related to
cybersecurity.”

5) Consequences: This pattern can dictate the exact number
of questions to generate or leave this decision to the LLM.
There are pros and cons to dictating the exact number. A pro
is that specifying an exact number of questions can tightly
scope the amount of additional information the user is forced
to provide so it is within a range they are willing and able to
contribute.
A con, however, is that given N questions there may be
an invaluable N + 1 question that will always be scoped out.
Alternatively, the LLM can be provided a range or allowed
to ask additional questions. Of course, by omitting a limit on
the number of questions the LLM may generate numerous
additional questions that overwhelm the user.

The user may have expertise in some topics related to the
question but not others. The fact check list can be tailored to
topics that the user is not as experienced in or where there
is the most risk. For example, in the prompt above, the user
is scoping the fact check list to security topics, since these
are likely very important from a risk perspective and may not
be well-understood by the developer. Targeting the facts also
reduces the cognitive burden on the user by potentially listing
fewer items for investigation.
5) Consequences: The Fact Check List pattern should be
employed whenever users are not experts in the domain for
which they are generating output. For example, a software
developer reviewing code could beneﬁt from the pattern
suggesting security considerations. In contrast, an expert on
software architecture is likely to identify errors in statements
about the software structure and need not see a fact check list
for these outputs.
Errors are potential in all LLM outputs, so Fact Check List
is an effective pattern to combine with other patterns, such
as by combining it with the Question Reﬁnement pattern. A
key aspect of this pattern is that users can inherently check it
against the output. In particular, users can directly compare the
fact check list to the output to verify the facts listed in the fact
check list actually appear in the output. Users can also identify
any omissions from the list. Although the fact check list may
also have errors, users often have sufﬁcient knowledge and
context to determine its completeness and accuracy relative to
the output.
One caveat of the Fact Check List pattern is that it only
applies when the output type is amenable to fact-checking. For
example, the pattern works when asking ChatGPT to generate
a Python “requirements.txt” ﬁle since it will list the versions
of libraries as facts that should be checked, which is handy as

I. The Fact Check List Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to ensure
that the LLM outputs a list of facts that are present in the
output and form an important part of the statements in the
output. This list of facts helps inform the user of the facts
(or assumptions) the output is based on. The user can then
perform appropriate due diligence on these facts/assumptions
to validate the veracity of the output.

2) Motivation: A current weakness of LLMs (including
ChatGPT) is they often rapidly (and even enthusiastically!)
generate convincing text that is factually incorrect. These
errors can take a wide range of forms, including fake statistics
to invalid version numbers for software library dependencies.
Due to the convincing nature of this generated text, however,
users may not perform appropriate due diligence to determine
its accuracy.

3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

J. The Template Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of the pattern is to
ensure an LLM’s output follows a precise template in terms of
structure. For example, the user might need to generate a URL
that inserts generated information into speciﬁc positions within
the URL path. This pattern allows the user to instruct the LLM
to produce its output in a format it would not ordinarily use
for the speciﬁed type of content being generated.
2) Motivation: In some cases, output must be produced in
a precise format that is application or use-case speciﬁc and
not known to the LLM. Since the LLM is not aware of the
template structure, it must be instructed on what the format
is and where the different parts of its output should go. This
could take the form of a sample data structure that is being
generated, a series of form letters being ﬁlled in, etc.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
I am going to provide a template for your output
X is my placeholder for content
Try to ﬁt the output into one or more of the placehold-
ers that I list
Please preserve the formatting and overall template that
I provide
This is the template: PATTERN with PLACEHOLD-
ERS

The ﬁrst statement directs the LLM to follow a speciﬁc
template for its output. The template will be used to try and
coerce the LLMs responses into a structure that is consistent
with the user’s formatting needs. This pattern is needed when
the target format is not known to the LLM. If the LLM already
has knowledge of the format, such as a speciﬁc ﬁle type, then
the template pattern can be skipped and the user can simply
specify the known format. However, there may be cases, such
as generating Javascript Object Notation (JSON), where there
is a large amount of variation in how the data could be
represented within that format and the template can be used to
ensure that the representation within the target format meets
the user’s additional constraints.
The second statement makes the LLM aware that the
template will contain a set of placeholders. Users will explain
how the output should be inserted into the template through the
placeholders. The placeholders allow the user to semantically
target where information should be inserted. Placeholders
can use formats, like NAME, that allow the LLM to infer
the semantic meaning of to determine where output should
be inserted (e.g., insert the person’s name in the NAME
placeholder). Moreover, by using placeholders, the user can
indicate what is not needed in the output – if a placeholder
doesn’t exist for a component of the generated output, then

K. The Inﬁnite Generation Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to
automatically generate a series of outputs (which may appear
inﬁnite) without having to reenter the generator prompt each
time. The goal is to limit how much text the user must type to
produce the next output, based on the assumption that the user
does not want to continually reintroduce the prompt. In some
variations, the intent is to allow the user to keep an initial
prompt template, but add additional variation to it through
additional inputs prior to each generated output.
2) Motivation: Many tasks require repetitive application of
the same prompt to multiple concepts. For example, generating
code for create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) operations
for a speciﬁc type of entity may require applying the same

Contextual Statements
I would like you to generate output forever, X output(s)
at a time.
(Optional) here is how to use the input I provide
between outputs.
(Optional) stop when I ask you to.

The ﬁrst statement speciﬁes that the user wants the LLM
to generate output indeﬁnitely, which effectively conveys the
information that the same prompt is going to be reused over
and over. By specifying the number of outputs that should be
generated at a time (i.e. “X outputs at a time”), the user can
rate limit the generation, which can be particularly important if
there is a risk that the output will exceed the length limitations
of the LLM for a single output.
The second statement provides optional instructions for how
to use the input provided by the user between outputs. By
specifying how additional user inputs between prompts can
be provided and leveraged, the user can create a prompting
strategy that leverages user feedback in the context of the
original prompt. The original prompt is still in the context of
the generation, but each user input between generation steps
is incorporated into the original prompt to reﬁne the output
using prescribed rules.
The third statement provides an optional way for the user
to stop the output generation process. This step is not always
needed, but can be useful in situations where there may be
the potential for ambiguity regarding whether or not the user-
provided input between inputs is meant as a reﬁnement for
the next generation or a command to stop. For example, an
explicit stop phrase could be created if the user was generating
data related to road signs, where the user might want to enter
a reﬁnement of the generation like “stop” to indicate that a
stop sign should be added to the output.
4) Example Implementation: The following is a sample
inﬁnite generation prompt for producing a series of URLs:
“From now on, I want you to generate a name
and job until I say stop. I am going to provide a
template for your output. Everything in all caps is a
placeholder. Any time that you generate text, try to
ﬁt it into one of the placeholders that I list. Please
preserve the formatting and overall template that I
provide:
This prompt is combining the functionality of both the
Inﬁnite Generation pattern and the Template pattern. The user
is requesting the LLM continuously generate a name and job
title until explicitly told to “stop”. The generated outputs are
then formatted into the template provided, which includes

L. The Visualization Generator Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to use
text generation to create visualizations. Many concepts are
easier to grasp in diagram or image format. The purpose of
this pattern is to create a pathway for the tool to produce
imagery that is associated with other outputs. This pattern
allows the creation of visualizations by creating inputs for
other well-known visualization tools that use text as their
input, such as Graphviz Dot [15] or DALL-E [13]. This
pattern can provide a more comprehensive and effective way
of communicating information by combining the strengths of
both the text generation and visualization tools.
2) Motivation: LLMs generally produce text and cannot
produce imagery. For example, an LLM cannot draw a diagram
to describe a graph. The Visualization Generator pattern over-
comes this limitation by generating textual inputs in the correct
format to plug into another tool that generates the correct
diagram. The motivation behind this pattern is to enhance the
output of the LLM and make it more visually appealing and
easier to understand for users. By using text inputs to generate
visualizations, users can quickly understand complex concepts
and relationships that may be hard to grasp through text alone.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

Contextual Statements
Generate an X that I can provide to tool Y to visualize
it

The goal of the contextual statements is to indicate to the
LLM that the output it is going to produce, “X”, is going to
be imagery. Since LLMs can’t generate images, the ”that I
can provide to tool Y to visualize it” clariﬁes that the LLM
is not expected to generate an image, but is instead expected

The ﬁrst statement, instructs the LLM to create a game and
provides the important scoping of the game to a topic area. .
One of the important capabilities of the pattern is that it allows
the user to create games by describing the rules of the game,
without having to determine the content of the game. The more
speciﬁc the topic, typically the more novel and interesting the
game play.
The second statement introduces the rules of the game to the
LLM. It is important that the rules ﬁt within the capabilities
of the LLM. Textual games that rely on input and output text
sequences work best. One of the key attributes of the pattern
is that the input text can be rich and expressive, which can
lead to interesting interfaces for the game. For example, the
user might express actions in the game as scripts dictating
a sequence of complex actions, such as “get a listing of all
network activity and check it for anomalies”, which go beyond
the scope of multiple choice or short answer inputs. Each rule
should be provided as a separate statement regarding some
aspect of the game.
4) Example Implementation: A sample cybersecurity game
prompt is shown below:
“We are going to play a cybersecurity game. You
are going to pretend to be a Linux terminal for a
computer that has been compromised by an attacker.
When I type in a command, you are going to output
the corresponding text that the Linux terminal would
produce. I am going to use commands to try and
ﬁgure out how the system was compromised. The
attack should have done one or more of the following
things: (1) launched new processes, (2) changed
ﬁles, (3) opened new ports to receive communi-
cation, (4) created new outbound connections, (5)
changed passwords, (6) created new user accounts,
or (7) read and stolen information. To start the game,
print a scenario of what happened that led to my
investigation and make the description have clues
that I can use to get started.”
This cybersecurity game prompt combines a number of pat-
terns, including Game Play and Persona. The Linux terminal
persona that is chosen for the game has been discussed in many
Internet posts [16]. This game further customizes the discussed
Linux persona to act as a Linux terminal of a computer
compromised by a cyberattack. ChatGPT responds to Linux
commands with appropriate terminal outputs and synthesizes
a fake ﬁle system that has clues to a cyberattack.
Sample output from this game with ChatGPT after typing
in “ls -alt”, the Linux command to generate a list of ﬁles in
the current directory is shown below (permissions have been
removed for formatting reasons):

“Whenever I ask you to visualize something, please
create either a Graphviz Dot ﬁle or DALL-E prompt
that I can use to create the visualization. Choose
the appropriate tools based on what needs to be
visualized.”

This example of the pattern adds a qualiﬁcation that the
output type for the visualization can be either for Graphviz
or DALL-E. The interesting aspect of this approach is that
it allows the LLM to use its semantic understanding of the
output format to automatically select the target tooling based
on what will be displayed. In this case, Graphviz would be for
visualizing graphs with a need for an exactly deﬁned structure.
DALL-E would be effective at visualizing realistic or artistic
imagery that does not have an exactly deﬁned structure. The
LLM can select the tool based on the needs of the visualization
and capabilities of each tool.
5) Consequences: The pattern creates a target pipeline
for the output to render a visualization. The pipeline may
include AI generators, such as DALL-E, that can produce
rich visualizations. The pattern allows the user to expand the
expressive capabilities of the output into the visual domain.

M. The Game Play Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to create
a game around a given topic. The pattern can be combined
with the Visualization Generator to add imagery to the game.
The game is centered around a speciﬁc topic and the LLM
will guide the game play. The pattern is particularly effective
when the rules of the game are relatively limited in scope, but
the content for the game is expected to be wide in scope. The
user can specify a limited set of rules and then the LLM can
automate generation of bodies of content for game play.
2) Motivation: You would like the LLM to generate scenar-
ios or questions revolving around a speciﬁc topic and require
users to apply problem solving or other skills to accomplish
a task related to the scenario. Generating all the content for
the game manually would be too time consuming, however, so
you would like the LLM to apply its knowledge of the topic
to guide the generation of content.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

total 56
5 user user
4096 Feb 16 14:31 .
1 user user 18881 Feb 16 14:31 .bash_history

Contextual Statements
Whenever you generate an answer
Explain the reasoning and assumptions behind your
answer
(Optional) ...so that I can improve my question

When the user then typed the command “cat .bash history”,
to display the contents of the log ﬁle showing the commands
run by the user, ChatGPT responded with:

The ﬁrst statement is requesting that, after generating an an-
swer, the LLM should explain the reasoning and assumptions
behind the answer. This statement helps the user understand
how the LLM arrived at the answer and can help build trust in
the model’s responses. The prompt includes the statement that
the purpose of the explanation is for the user to reﬁne their
question. This additional statement gives the LLM the context
it needs to better tailor its explanations to the speciﬁc purpose
of aising the user in producing follow-on questions.
4) Example Implementation:
This example tailors the
prompt speciﬁcally to the domain of providing answers related
to code:
”When you provide an answer, please explain the
reasoning and assumptions behind your selection
of software frameworks. If possible, use speciﬁc
examples or evidence with associated code samples
to support your answer of why the framework is
the best selection for the task. Moreover, please
address any potential ambiguities or limitations in
your answer, in order to provide a more complete
and accurate response.”
The pattern is further customized to instruct the LLM that
it should justify its selection of software frameworks, but not
necessarily other aspects of the answer. In addition, the user
dictates that code samples should be used to help explain the
motivation for selecting the speciﬁc software framework.
5) Consequences: One consequence of the Reﬂection pat-
tern is that it may not be effective for users who do not
understand the topic area of the discussion. For example, a
highly technical question by a non-technical user may result
in a complex rationale for the answer that the user cannot
fathom. As with other prompt patterns, there is a risk the
output may include errors or inaccurate assumptions included
in the explanation of the rationale that the user may not be
able to spot. This pattern can be combined with the Fact Check
List to help address this issue.

cd /var/www/html
sudo rm -rf *
sudo wget
sudo chmod 777 backdoor.php
exit
ls -alt
ps -ef
netstat -tulnp

In the output above, ChatGPT generated a fake log ﬁle with
realistic commands for deleting the data being served by the
web server in /var/www/html and replacing the content
with a backdoor into the system.
5) Consequences: This pattern can be combined effectively
with the Persona, Inﬁnite Generation, and Visualization Gen-
erator patterns. For example, the cybersecurity game uses the
Persona pattern so the LLM can masquerade as a Linux termi-
nal. For a network security game, the Visualization Generator
could be employed to add the ability to visualize the network
topology and trafﬁc ﬂows.

N. The Reﬂection Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The goal of this pattern is to ask
the model to automatically explain the rationale behind given
answers to the user. The pattern allows users to better assess
the output’s validity, as well as inform users how an LLM
arrived at a particular answer. Reﬂection can clarify any points
of confusion, uncover underlying assumptions, and reveal gaps
in knowledge or understanding.
2) Motivation: LLMs can and do make mistakes. More-
over, users may not understand why an LLM is producing
a particular output and how to adapt their prompt to solve
a problem with the output. By asking LLM to automatically
explain the rationale behind its answers, users can gain a better
understanding of how the model is processing the input, what
assumptions it is making, and what data it is drawing on.
LLMs may sometime provide incomplete, incorrect, or
ambiguous answers. Reﬂection is an aid to help address these
shortcomings and ensure the information provided by LLM
is as accurate. A further beneﬁt of the pattern is that it can
help users debug their prompts and determine why they are
not getting results that meet expectations. This pattern is
particularly effective for the exploration of topics that can
be confused with other topics or that may have nuanced
interpretations and where knowing the precise interpretation
that the LLM used is important.

O. The Refusal Breaker Pattern
1) Intent and Context: The goal of this pattern is to ask an
LLM to automatically help users rephrase a question when it
refuses to give an answer. This pattern has the potential for
misuse, however, e.g., to generate phishing emails or perform
other actions that violate LLM policy ﬁlters. Caution should
therefore be exercised when applying this pattern to ensure
it is used ethically and responsibly. This pattern has been
used successfully in some LLMs to overcome the underlying
prompts used to program the LLM and prevent harmful output
generation.

5) Consequences: This pattern provides a potential path
for misuse, so organizations, parents, or other stakeholders
may need to restrict the usage of the LLM. The ﬁrst step in
going around guardrails on usage is to understand where the
guardrails are. In future work, a complement of this pattern
may be developed to hide the underlying prompt information
and rationale from users to prevent discovery.
Although the rationale and alternate rewordings are gener-
ated, there is no guarantee that users will be able to overcome
the refusal. The alternate questions that are generated may not
be of interest to the user or helpful in answering the original
question. The pattern mainly provides an aid in determining
what the LLM can answer, but not a guarantee that it will
answer a semantically equivalent variation of the original
question.

Contextual Statements
Whenever you can’t answer a question
Explain why you can’t answer the question
Provide one or more alternative wordings of the ques-
tion that you could answer

P. The Context Manager Pattern

1) Intent and Context: The intent of this pattern is to enable
users to specify or remove context for a conversation with
an LLM. The goal is to focus the conversation on speciﬁc
topics or exclude unrelated topics from consideration. This
pattern gives users greater control over what statements the
LLM considers or ignores when generating output.
2) Motivation: LLMs often struggle to interpret the in-
tended context of the current question or generate irrelevant
responses based on prior inputs or irrelevant attention on
the wrong statements. By focusing on explicit contextual
statements or removing irrelevant statements, users can help
the LLM better understand the question and generate more
accurate responses. Users may introduce unrelated topics or
reference information from earlier in the dialogue, which
may can disrupt the ﬂow of the conversation. The Context
Manager pattern aims to emphasize or remove speciﬁc aspects
of the context to maintain relevance and coherence in the
conversation.
3) Structure and Key Ideas: Fundamental contextual state-
ments:

The ﬁrst statement sets the stage that this set of instructions
should only be applied when a question can’t be answered.
The user does not want to trigger these instructions under
normal circumstances. The second statement instructs the
LLM to provide an explanation of why the question can’t be
answered. The explanation is likely to include assumptions,
constraints, or misunderstandings that can be leveraged by the
user to strategize about how to reword the question. Although
just the explanation of why the question can’t be answered
could help a user overcome the refusal, the pattern adds an
additional statement for the LLM to suggest rewordings that
would be acceptable. The pattern combines both reasoning
and suggested rewordings to improve the chances that the user
will ﬁnd a path around whatever roadblocks are preventing the
question form being answered.
4) Example Implementation: The Refusal Breaker pattern
can be be implemented and applied with the following phras-
ing:

“Whenever you can’t answer a question, explain why
and provide one or more alternate wordings of the
question that you can’t answer so that I can improve
my questions.”

Contextual Statements
Within scope X
Please consider Y
Please ignore Z
(Optional) start over

A sample discourse after using the pattern is shown below:

User: What is the meaning of life?
ChatGPT: As an AI language model, I do not
have personal beliefs or opinions. The meaning of
life is a complex philosophical question that has
been pondered by humans for centuries and can
vary greatly from person to person. It may be more
productive to rephrase the question in a way that can
be answered by information and knowledge, such
as “What are some philosophical perspectives on

Statements about what to consider or ignore should list key
concepts, facts, instructions, etc. that should be included or
removed from the context. The more explicit the statements
are, the more likely the LLM will take appropriate action. For
example, if the user asks to ignore subjects related to a topic,
yet some of the those statements were discussed far back in the
conversation, the LLM may not properly disregard the relevant
information. The more explicit the list is, therefore, the better
the inclusion/exclusion behavior will be.

“When analyzing the following pieces of code, only
consider security aspects.”

Contextual Statements
I would like to achieve X
I know that I need to perform steps A,B,C
Provide a complete sequence of steps for me
Fill in any missing steps
Identify any unnecessary steps

Likewise, to remove context consider using the following
prompt:

“When analyzing the following pieces of code, do
not consider formatting or naming conventions.”

Clarity and speciﬁcity are important when providing or
removing context to/from an LLM so it can better understand
the intended scope of the conversation and generate more
relevant responses. In many situations, the user may want to
completely start over and can employ this prompt to reset the
LLM’s context:

The ﬁrst statement “I would like to achieve X” focuses the
LLM on the overall goal that the recipe needs to be built
to achieve. The steps will be organized and completed to
sequentially achieve the goal speciﬁed. The second statement
provides the partial list of steps that the user would like
to include in the overall recipe. These serve as intermediate
waypoints for the path that the LLM is going to generate or
constraints on the structure of the recipe. The next statement
in the pattern, “provide a complete sequence of steps for
me”, indicates to the LLM that the goal is to provide a
complete sequential ordering of steps. The “ﬁll in any missing
steps” helps ensure that the LLM will attempt to complete
the recipe without further follow-up by making some choices
on the user’s behalf regarding missing steps, as opposed to
just stating additional information that is needed. Finally, the
last statement, “identify any unnecessary steps,” is useful in
ﬂagging inaccuracies in the user’s original request so that the
ﬁnal recipe is efﬁcient.
4) Example Implementation: An example usage of this
pattern in the context of deploying a software application to
the cloud is shown below:
“I am trying to deploy an application to the cloud. I
know that I need to install the necessary dependen-
cies on a virtual machine for my application. I know
that I need to sign up for an AWS account. Please
provide a complete sequence of steps. Please ﬁll in
any missing steps. Please identify any unnecessary
steps.”
Depending on the use case and constraints, “installing
necessary dependencies on a virtual machine” may be an
unnecessary step. For example, if the application is already
packaged in a Docker container, the container could be de-
ployed directly to the AWS Fargate Service, which does not
require any management of the underlying virtual machines.
The inclusion of the “identify unnecessary steps” language
will cause the LLM to ﬂag this issue and omit the steps from
the ﬁnal recipe.
5) Consequences: One consequence of the recipe pattern is
that a user may not always have a well-speciﬁed description
of what they would like to implement, construct, or design.
Moreover, this pattern may introduce unwanted bias from the
user’s initially selected steps so the LLM may try to ﬁnd a
solution that incorporates them, rather than ﬂagging them as
unneeded. For example, an LLM may try to ﬁnd a solution
that does install dependencies for a virtual machine, even if
there are solutions that do not require that.

“Ignore everything that we have discussed. Start
over.”

The “start over” idea helps produce a complete reset of the
context.
5) Consequences: One consequence of this pattern is that
it may inadvertently wipe out patterns applied to the con-
versation that the user is unaware of. For example, if an
organization injects a series of helpful patterns into the start of
a conversation, the user may not be aware of these patterns and
remove them through a reset of the context. This reset could
potentially eliminate helpful capabilities of the LLM, while
not making it obvious that the user will lose this functionality.
A potential solution to this problem is to include in the prompt
a request to explain what topics/instructions will potentially be
lost before proceeding.

Q. The Recipe Pattern

1) Intent and Context: This pattern provides constraints to
ultimately output a sequence of steps given some partially
provided “ingredients” that must be conﬁgured in a sequence
of steps to achieve a stated goal. It combines the Template,
Alternative Approaches, and Reﬂection patterns.
2) Motivation: Users often want an LLM to analyze a
concrete sequence of steps or procedures to achieve a stated
outcome. Typically, users generally know—or have an idea
of—what the end goal should look like and what “ingredients”
belong in the prompt. However, they may not necessarily know
the precise ordering of steps to achieve that end goal.
For example, a user may want a precise speciﬁcation on how
a piece of code should be implemented or automated, such as
“create an Ansible playbook to ssh into a set of servers, copy
text ﬁles from each server, spawn a monitoring process on
each server, and then close the ssh connection to each server.
In other words, this pattern represents a generalization of the
example of “given the ingredients in my fridge, provide dinner
recipes.” A user may also want to specify a set number of
alternative possibilities, such as “provide 3 different ways of
deploying a web application to AWS using Docker containers
and Ansible using step by step instructions”.

Software patterns [10], [11] have been extensively studied
and documented in prior work. Patterns are widely used in
software engineering to express the intent of design structures
in a way that is independent of implementation details. Patterns
provide a mental picture of the goals that the pattern is
trying to achieve and the forces that it is trying to resolve.
A key advantage of patterns is their composability, allowing
developers to build pattern sequences and pattern languages
that can be used to address complex problems. Patterns have
also been investigated in other domains, such as contract
design for decentralized ledgers [17], [18].
The importance of good prompt design with LLMs, such as
ChatGPT, is well understood [19]–[28]. Previous studies have
examined the effect of prompt words on AI generative models.
For example, Liu et al. [29] investigated how different
prompt key words affect image generation and different char-
acteristics of images. Other work has explored using LLMs
to generate visualizations [30]. Han et al. [31] researched
strategies for designing prompts for classiﬁcation tasks. Other
research has looked at boolean prompt design for literature
queries [32]. Yet other work has speciﬁcally examined prompts
for software and ﬁxing bugs [33].
Our work is complementary to prior work by providing
a structure for documenting, discussing, and reasoning about
prompts that can aid users in developing mental models for
structuring prompts to solve common problems.
The quality of the answers produced by LLMs, particuarly
ChatGPT, has been assessed in a number of domains. For
example, ChatGPT has been used to take the medical licensing
exam with surprisingly good results [3]. The use of ChatGPT
in Law School has also been explored [34]. Other papers have
looked at its mathematical reasoning abilities [35]. As more
domains are explored, we expect that domain-speciﬁc pattern
catalogs will be developed to share domain-speciﬁc problem
solving prompt structures.

• Documenting prompt patterns as a pattern catalog is
useful, but insufﬁcient. Our experience indicates that
much more work can be done in this area, both in terms
of reﬁning and expanding the prompt patterns presented
in this paper, as well as in exploring new and innovative
ways of using LLMs. In particular, weaving the prompt
patterns captured here as a pattern catalog into a more
expression pattern language will help guide users of
LLMs more effectively.

• LLM Capabilities will evolve over time, likely necessitat-
ing reﬁnement of patterns. As LLM capabilities change,
some patterns may no longer be necessary, be obviated
by different styles of interaction or conversation/session
management approaches, or require enhancement to func-
tion correctly. Continued work will be needed to docu-
ment and catalog patterns that provide reusable solutions.

• The prompt patterns are generalizable to many differ-
ent domains. Although most of the patterns have been
discussed in the context of software development, these
same patterns are applicable in arbitrary domains, ranging
from inﬁnite generation of stories for entertainment to
educational games to explorations of topics.

We hope that this paper inspires further research and de-
velopment in this area that will help enhance prompt pattern
design to create new and unexpected capabilities for conver-
sational LLMs.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von
Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill et al.,
“On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[2] Y. Bang, S. Cahyawijaya, N. Lee, W. Dai, D. Su, B. Wilie, H. Lovenia,
Z. Ji, T. Yu, W. Chung et al., “A multitask, multilingual, multimodal
evaluation of chatgpt on reasoning, hallucination, and interactivity,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04023, 2023.
[3] A. Gilson, C. Safranek, T. Huang, V. Socrates, L. Chi, R. A. Taylor,
and D. Chartash, “How well does chatgpt do when taking the medical
licensing exams?” medRxiv, pp. 2022–12, 2022.
[4] A. Carleton, M. H. Klein, J. E. Robert, E. Harper, R. K. Cunningham,
D. de Niz, J. T. Foreman, J. B. Goodenough, J. D. Herbsleb, I. Ozkaya,
and D. C. Schmidt, “Architecting the future of software engineering,”
Computer, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 89–93, 2022.
[5] “Github copilot · your ai pair programmer.” [Online]. Available:

[6] O. Asare, M. Nagappan, and N. Asokan, “Is github’s copilot as bad
as humans at introducing vulnerabilities in code?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.04741, 2022.
[7] H. Pearce, B. Ahmad, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and R. Karri, “Asleep at
the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contribu-
tions,” in 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE,
2022, pp. 754–768.
[8] J. Krochmalski, IntelliJ IDEA Essentials.
Packt Publishing Ltd, 2014.
[9] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre-
train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods
in natural language processing,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 9,
pp. 1–35, 2023.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

This paper presented a framework for documenting and
applying a catalog of prompt patterns for large language
models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT. These prompt patterns are
analogous to software patterns and aim to provide reusable
solutions to problems that users face when interacting with
LLMs to perform a wide range of tasks. The catalog of prompt
patterns captured via this framework (1) provides a structured
way of discussing prompting solutions, (2) identiﬁes patterns
in prompts, rather than focusing on speciﬁc prompt examples,
and (3) classiﬁes patterns so users are guided to more efﬁcient
and effective interactions with LLMs.
The following lessons learned were gleaned from our work
on prompt patterns:

• Prompt patterns signiﬁcantly enrich the capabilities that
can be created in a conversational LLM. For example,
prompts can lead to the generation of cybersecurity
games, complete with ﬁctitious terminal commands that