Full Stack Optimization of Transformer Inference: a Survey

Sehoon Kim∗

Coleman Hooper∗

Thanakul Wattanawong

UC Berkeley

UC Berkeley

UC Berkeley

Minwoo Kang

UC Berkeley

Ruohan Yan

UC Berkeley

Hasan Genc

UC Berkeley

Grace Dinh

UC Berkeley

Qijing Huang

NVIDIA

Kurt Keutzer

UC Berkeley

arXiv:2302.14017v1 [cs.CL] 27 Feb 2023

Michael W. Mahoney

ICSI, LBNL, UC Berkeley

Yakun Sophia Shao

UC Berkeley

Amir Gholami

ICSI, UC Berkeley

1
INTRODUCTION

ABSTRACT

Deep learning models have scaled up to billions of parameters
and billions of Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) operations during both
training and inference. As a result, there has been a growing interest
in computing these models efficiently and in deploying these com-
pute and memory-intensive workloads on resource-constrained
edge devices. These edge devices have tight energy and memory
constraints, and the corresponding applications that leverage deep
learning models also often have real-time latency constraints.
CPUs and GPUs are both commonly used in general-performance
computing platforms, and they have the advantage of being both
ubiquitous and capable of supporting a wide variety of workloads
and operations. However, this flexibility comes at a cost of reduced
efficiency. Deep learning models are composed of a small number
of distinct operations that are repeated millions or billions of times,
and therefore they often do not require a high level of flexibility.
Additionally, while modern CPUs and GPUs can perform several
operations in parallel, they lack the ability to leverage the massive
data reuse opportunities in deep learning models.
The combination of a need for fast, efficient computation, the use
of a small number of distinct operations, and the opportunities for
data reuse have all led to the use of hardware accelerators for deep
learning. A multitude of enterprise deep learning accelerators, such
as [1, 4, 62, 91, 100, 115, 134, 137, 171, 196, 208], have been developed
and integrated into commodity hardware by industry in the past
decade. This parallels many research accelerators developed in
academia [34, 37, 39, 40, 59, 69, 70, 81, 169]. Together with hardware
accelerator development, the software frameworks [3, 32, 98, 167]
and compilers [33, 161, 185] for deploying various deep learning
algorithms have also enhanced and matured. These tools enable
the execution of deep learning algorithms on accelerators, and
they perform mapping optimizations to improve the performance
and efficiency of the full deep learning pipeline. Nonetheless, the
fast-evolving deep learning algorithms still keep introducing new
demands for hardware and software support, as well as their co-
optimization, to satisfy various deployment constraints.

Recent advances in state-of-the-art neural network architecture de-
sign have been moving toward Transformer models. These models
achieve superior accuracy across a wide range of applications in
computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recog-
nition. This trend has been consistent over the past several years
since Transformer models were originally introduced. However,
the amount of compute and bandwidth required for inference of
recent Transformer models is growing at a significant rate, and
this has made their deployment in latency-sensitive applications
challenging. As such, there has been an increased focus on mak-
ing Transformer models more efficient, with methods that range
from changing the architecture design, all the way to developing
dedicated domain-specific accelerators. In this work, we survey
different approaches for efficient Transformer inference, including:
(i) analysis and profiling of the bottlenecks in existing Transformer
architectures and their similarities and differences with previous
convolutional models; (ii) implications of Transformer architec-
ture on hardware, including the impact of non-linear operations
such as Layer Normalization, Softmax, and GELU, as well as linear
operations, on hardware design; (iii) approaches for optimizing a
fixed Transformer architecture; (iv) challenges in finding the right
mapping and scheduling of operations for Transformer models;
and (v) approaches for optimizing Transformer models by adapt-
ing the architecture using neural architecture search. Finally, we
perform a case study by applying the surveyed optimizations on
Gemmini, the open-source, full-stack deep neural network accel-
erator generator, and we show how each of these approaches can
yield improvements, compared to previous benchmark results on
Gemmini. Among other things, we find that a full-stack co-design
approach with the aforementioned methods can result in up to
88.7× speedup with a minimal performance degradation for Trans-
former inference.

∗Equal contribution.

addressed properly, this can result in less than 1% hardware
utilization (Sec. 3.4 and Fig. 14).
• For Transformer accelerators, it is often better to have a larger
accumulator size and smaller scratchpad size, while the op-
posite is often more optimal for CNN accelerators. Changing
accelerator architecture to incorporate this observation can re-
sult in a 36% latency improvement over the baseline optimized
for CNN benchmarks (Sec. 3.4.3).
• Despite the fact that scheduling matmuls in Transformers only
requires 3 loops, as compared to 6 for convolutions in CNNs,
we found that it is as challenging to find performant schedules
for Transformers as it is for CNNs. The selection of appropriate
scheduling decisions for Transformers involves a large number
of decisions, with the best and worst solutions exhibiting perfor-
mance differences of up to four orders of magnitude (Sec. 5.5.1
and Fig. 18, 19, 20).
• Fusing Batch Normalization with the neighboring convolution
in CNN models is straightforward. However, when fusing Layer
Normalization with the preceding matmul in the Transformer
architecture, constraints are imposed on the mapping, partic-
ularly related to tile sizes. This requires further consideration
since the runtime cost due to the mapping constraints could out-
weigh the gains from operation fusion in certain circumstances
(Sec. 5.5.2 and Fig. 21, 22).

The recent rise in popularity of Transformers and large language
models [22, 44, 52, 58, 86, 173–175, 177, 190, 198] for solving various
natural language processing (NLP) tasks presents a brand new set
of challenges in the design of accelerators as well as frameworks.
There has also been an increased focus on making Transformer
inference more efficient, especially due to their growing size and
run-time complexity. However, there is still a lack of understanding
regarding the workload characteristics of Transformer architec-
tures, and thus of the design principles necessary for effectively
running these models, when compared to the more well-known
convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures. For instance,
compared to the conventional CNN-focused design, Transformers
are mostly composed of matrix multiplications (matmuls) together
with memory-intensive nonlinear operations. In addition, the com-
putational graph and dataflow of Transformer models are more
complex than that of CNNs, with more types of operation nodes,
as well as more dataflow splits and concatenations. All these chal-
lenges require us to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the
current hardware and software solutions as well as the various
design trade-offs for Transformer inference. Performing such an
analysis will enable us to build a holistic and comprehensive under-
standing of the requirements for efficiently running Transformers.
The contribution of this work is two-fold: (1) to analyze the
run-time characteristics of Transformers and to survey different
approaches for efficient Transformer inference; and (2) to perform
a case study by applying the surveyed methodologies on Gem-
mini [70], the full-stack deep neural network (DNN) accelerator
generator. The longer-term goal of this work is to characterize dif-
ferent factors across the hardware and software stack in order to
optimize Transformer inference.
Regarding our first contribution, this paper contains a survey and
analysis covering different hierarchies in end-to-end deep learning
inference, with a particular focus on Transformers. This includes:

2
TRANSFORMER MODEL ARCHITECTURE
AND PERFORMANCE BOTTLENECKS

In this section, we start with a high level introduction to the building
blocks of the Transformer architecture. We first discuss the multi-
head attention and feed-forward modules, the non-linear operations
used in Transformers, and the difference between Encoder/Decoder
models, in Sec. 2.1. We then analyze the impact of these different
blocks on hardware performance using arithmetic, as well as the
analytical modeling and direct profiling of each component, in
Sec. 2.2.

• Analysis and profiling of the runtime characteristics and bot-
tlenecks of the Transformer architecture (Sec. 2).
• Hardware architectures for Transformer inference, including
the impact of the non-linear operations of the Transformer
architecture on their design (Sec 3).
• Optimization strategies such as pruning and quantization for
further improving the performance of a fixed Transformer ar-
chitecture (Sec 4).
• Mapping and scheduling of operations in the Transformer ar-
chitecture and the associated challenges (Sec. 5).
• Designing and adapting Transformer architectures to be more
hardware efficient through an automated neural architecture
search process (Sec. 6).

2.1
High-Level Overview of Transformer
Architecture

A Transformer architecture [217] typically consists of multiple
Transformer blocks, each of which includes a multi-head attention
(MHA) module and a feed-forward (FFN) module, and each of which
is followed by a Layer Normalization (LayerNorm) operation and
a residual connection. The detailed computations of MHA and
FFN are illustrated in Fig. 1, and the configuration parameters for
Transformer architectures (along with the values used by BERT-
Base and BERT-Large) are provided in Tab. 1. An input sequence to
the Transformer block is composed of 𝑙tokens, each represented
by a vector of 𝑑dimension, forming a 𝑑× 𝑙matrix. A token is a
segment of an input sequence. For example, when the input is a
sentence, a token may be a word or a sentence fragment.
The MHA module (see Fig. 1, Left) first projects this sequence by
multiplying it with three different weight matrices: 𝑊𝑄, 𝑊𝐾, and
𝑊𝑉(the so-called query, key, and value matrices). This yields three
different activations, namely the query, key, and value activations.
The query, key, and value activations are then split into ℎchunks,

Regarding our second contribution, our case study of applying
the surveyed methodologies on deploying Transformers yields sev-
eral key findings, including the following:

• Gemmini, which was originally designed for CNN workloads,
does not yield hardware accelerator architectures that are well-
suited for Transformer inference. The primary bottleneck for
running Transformers on CNN domain-specific accelerators is
not necessarily linear operations, but rather it is the time spent
on floating-point non-linear operations, as well as quantization
and dequantization operations. Unless those operations are

WQ

𝑑x 𝑑

𝑑/ℎx 𝑙

𝑑x 𝑙

𝑙x 𝑑/ℎ

WK

W1

𝑑x 𝑑

Transpose

𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 𝑑

𝑑/ℎx 𝑙

𝑑x 𝑙

Encoder

𝑑x 𝑙

𝑙x 𝑙

Input

Attention

𝑑x 𝑙

GELU

Softmax

Output

𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 𝑙

𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 𝑙

WV

𝑙x 𝑙

𝑑x 𝑑

𝑑/ℎx 𝑙

𝑑/ℎx 𝑙

𝑑x 𝑙

W2
Norm + Add

𝑑x 𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁

𝑑x 𝑙

Encoder

Concatenate

LayerNorm

Output

𝑑x 𝑙

WOut

Norm + Add

𝑑x 𝑑

LayerNorm
Attention

Feed-Forward Network (FFN) Module

Output

𝑑x 𝑙
𝑑x 𝑙

𝑑x 𝑙

Muti-Head Attention (MHA) Module

Figure 1: Map of the computations performed in (Left) the multi-head attention (MHA) module and (Right) the feed-forward network (FFN)
module in the Transformer encoder block.

Table 1: Configuration parameters for Transformer architectures.
Parameters for BERT-Base, BERT-Large, and GPT-2 (smallest) are
given as examples. Note that GPT-2 has the same parameters as BERT-
Base. Sequence length can be any number, as long as it doesn’t exceed
the maximum possible sequence length.

Table 2: Linear operations in Transformer models. The last column
is the matrix multiplication dimensions, i.e., 𝑚× 𝑛× 𝑘means the
input dimensions of 𝑚× 𝑛and 𝑛× 𝑘, and the output dimension of
𝑚× 𝑘. Note that act-to-act matmuls are both repeated ℎtimes in the
multi-headed scheme. The entire computation graphs of MHA and
FFN are illustrated in detail in Fig. 1.

Symbol
Parameter
BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

Module
operation
matmul dim

𝑁
# Layers
12
24
12
𝑑
Model dimension
768
1024
768
ℎ
# Attention Heads
12
16
12
𝑑FFN
FFN dimension
3072
4096
3072
𝑙
Sequence length
-
-
-

MHA
𝑊𝑄projection
𝑑× 𝑑× 𝑙
𝑊𝐾projection
𝑑× 𝑑× 𝑙
𝑊𝑉projection
𝑑× 𝑑× 𝑙
query × key
𝑙× 𝑑/ℎ× 𝑙
attn. score × value
𝑑/ℎ× 𝑙× 𝑙
𝑊out projection
𝑑× 𝑑× 𝑙

with each chunk having a hidden dimension of 𝑑/ℎ. These chunks
are then forwarded to ℎdifferent attention heads, where the query
and key chunks are multiplied along the hidden dimension, gen-
erating an activation matrix of size 𝑙× 𝑙. This activation matrix is
then passed through the Softmax operation (the output of which
is often referred to as an attention score) and multiplied with the
value chunk, resulting in an activation of hidden dimension 𝑑/ℎ.
Subsequently, all of the activations from the attention heads are
concatenated along the hidden dimension to generate a single ac-
tivation of hidden dimension 𝑑, which is then projected into the
same dimension by the last linear layer with the weight matrix𝑊out.
Finally, the output from the last linear layer in the MHA module is
passed through the LayerNorm operator before being added to a
residual connection to get the MHA module output.
In summary, an MHA module consists of six linear operations,
four of which are identical weight-to-activation matmuls (i.e., the
𝑊𝑄,𝑊𝐾,𝑊𝑉and𝑊out projections), and the remaining two of which
are activation-to-activation matmuls (i.e., query × key and attention
score × value). Throughout this paper, we refer to the first type of
matmuls as projections and the second type of matmuls as activation-
to-activation matmuls (act-to-act matmuls for short), as they have
different run-time behaviors.

FFN
𝑊1 projection
𝑑FFN × 𝑑× 𝑙
𝑊2 projection
𝑑× 𝑑FFN × 𝑙

The FFN module (see Fig. 1, RIght) is a relatively simple block
consisting of two linear layers. The input sequence is first projected
from the hidden dimension 𝑑to a higher FFN dimension 𝑑FFN via
the first linear layer with the weight matrix 𝑊1. Subsequently, the
projected sequence is projected back to the original dimension 𝑑
through the second linear layer with the weight matrix 𝑊2. Gener-
ally, the dimension 𝑑FFN is chosen to be 4× larger than 𝑑, resulting
in the 4:1 aspect rate of 𝑊1 and 𝑊2 (e.g., in BERT-Base [52]). In
between these two linear layers is a non-linear layer. Typically,
GELU [85] is used for this [22, 52, 143, 173, 174]. Tab. 2 summarizes
all types of linear layers in a Transformer block in both MHA and
FFN modules.

2.1.1
Nonlinear Operations. There are several nonlinear oper-
ations such as Softmax, LayerNorm, and GELU that require special-
ized support or off-chip computation. These nonlinear operations
account for a relatively smaller portion of the overall operations,
when inferring with Transformer networks, as compared to the

(b) Layer Normalization
(a) Softmax

(c) Batch Normalization

Sequence Length

Sequence Length

Height, Width

𝛾𝑒+𝛽𝑒
𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥𝑖) =
𝑒𝑥𝑖

𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡= 𝑝𝑖𝑛−𝜇𝑡

𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡= 𝑝𝑖𝑛−𝜇𝑐

𝛾𝑐+𝛽𝑐
…

σ𝑗𝑒𝑥𝑗

𝜎𝑡

𝜎𝑐

…

…

Hidden Dimension

Sequence Length

γ, β learned during
training and applied along

…

…

γ, β learned during
training per channel

…

Channel

Sum of exponential
terms is computed along

the sequence length

…
…
…
μ, σ computed during

…
…
…

…
…
…

the sequence length

μ, σ learned during
training per channel

inference across the

…

…

…

hidden dimension

Figure 2: Diagrams outlining the Softmax, LayerNorm, and BatchNorm operations. Since they rely on runtime statistics, LayerNorm and Softmax
both require multiple passes over the input in order to compute the nonlinear operation. In the case of Softmax, a first pass over the inputs is
required to compute the denominator. For LayerNorm, three passes are required over the inputs: one to compute the mean; one to compute the
standard deviation; and one to apply the normalization. Unlike LayerNorm and Softmax, BatchNorm only uses statistics which are learned during
training, and therefore it only requires one pass over the inputs.

Output (1 token / iter)

Output (𝒍tokens)

Output (1 token / iter)

Decoder Block

Encoder Block

Decoder Block

Encoded Sequence

…

(𝒍𝒆tokens)

…

…

Feed-Forward Network

Encoder Block

Ne

Nd

Feed-Forward Network

Feed-Forward Network

Nd

Ne

…

Cross-Attention

Self-Attention

Self-Attention

Encoder Block

Self-Attention

Input (𝒍𝒆tokens)

x 𝒍iterations

Input (𝒍tokens)

Input (1 token / iter)

Input (1 token / iter)
x 𝒍𝒅iterations

(b) Decoder-Only

(c) Encoder-Decoder

(a) Encoder-Only

Figure 3: Variants of Transformer networks. (a) An encoder-only model, which performs inference for all tokens in parallel. (b) A decoder-only
model, which performs inference in an auto-regressive manner. (c) An encoder-decoder model, which uses the output of the encoded sequence as
input to a cross-attention module.

linear operations (Sec. 2.2.2). However, they are more challenging
to compute on typical hardware than matmuls, and they can incur
significant overhead if not handled appropriately.
The nonlinear operations present challenges in terms of efficient
utilization of temporal memory as well as efficient computation.
This is because they require multiple passes over all input values,
which requires those values to be held in temporal memory. As
depicted in Fig. 2 (a), the Softmax operation involves (1) exponen-
tial operations, (2) summing up the results across the sequence
length dimension, and (3) normalizing the input by dividing it by
the summation result. It is also well known that the exponential
function is prone to numerical overflow, prompting the use of the
maximum subtraction trick [151] that transforms the expression
exp(𝑥𝑖)/Í
𝑗exp(𝑥𝑗) into exp(𝑥𝑖−𝑥max)/Í
𝑗exp(𝑥𝑗−𝑥max), where
𝑥max is the maximum of the 𝑥𝑗’s. This, however, requires an addi-
tional pass over the inputs, resulting in a three-pass numerically
stable implementation. Computing the LayerNorm function also
requires multiple passes over the entire input values across the
hidden dimension, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (b). In the first pass, the
mean must be computed. In the second pass, this is then used to
compute the standard deviation. Finally, in the third pass, where

the normalization is actually applied, one division per input value
is required.
Furthermore, the nonlinear operations entail challenges in op-
eration fusing, which is a common technique to reduce interlayer
communications by combining multiple operations into a single
operation (Sec. 5.2.1). Unlike Batch Normalization (BatchNorm) in
many CNN architectures that can be seamlessly subsumed into pre-
ceding or succeeding linear operations [97], LayerNorm requires
computing the mean and variance of the inputs at runtime. There-
fore, to fuse this operation with the preceding matmul operation,
the entire output matrix must be accumulated in place across the
reduction dimension (i.e., the dimension in which the mean and
variance are computed) before writing out results. This leads to
irregular tiling dimensions and lower data reuse. As a result, there
is a nontrivial tradeoff between fusing these operations with pre-
vious layers versus using better tiling dimensions for maximizing
reuse. A detailed analysis of this tradeoff will be provided later in
Sec. 5.5.2.

2.1.2
Encoder and Decoder Architectures. The Transformer
architecture was originally introduced as an encoder-decoder model
for machine translation tasks [217]. In this setting, the encoder
takes the entire source language sentence as input and passes it
through multiple Transformer encoder blocks, extracting the high-
level features of the input sentence. These extracted features are
then fed into the decoder, which is responsible for generating the
tokens in the target language, one after another. This is based on
the source language features from the encoder as well as the tokens
it has previously generated [217]. In subsequent works, encoder-
only and decoder-only architectures were introduced, taking only
the encoder and the decoder components, respectively, from the
original encoder-decoder architecture [46, 174] (Fig. 3).

Consequently, these operations scale linearly with sequence length,
implying that more compute is required to process a token in a
larger time step than a token in a smaller time step. A key detail to
note is that the full key and value activations must be present for the
input token to attend to all previously generated tokens. A common
optimization technique for token generation is to cache and reuse
the intermediate key and value of the previously generated tokens
in subsequent iterations, thus avoiding the need to recompute them
for every iteration. Taken together, the end-to-end complexity of
generating the full sequence scales linearly for the projection layers
and quadratically for the other two act-to-act matmuls. The end-to-
end computation graph of the Transformer decoder block is also
provided in Fig. 27 of Appendix A.6.

Encoder Block. In encoder-only Transformer models [52, 143,
240], the input sequence is passed through the repeated encoder
blocks all at once. For this reason, the encoder-only structure is
suitable for natural language understanding tasks [52, 143], such as
sentiment analysis [202] or sentence similarity analysis [28, 53, 96],
where the entire input sequences are fed into the model.
In the encoder block, the inference is composed of matrix-matrix
multiplications as well as element-wise additions and nonlinear
operations. The cost of the projection layers in the MHA module
and FFN module scales linearly with the input sequence length 𝑙.
However, the act-to-act matmuls in the MHA module scale quadrat-
ically with sequence length (as demonstrated in query × key and
attn. score × value rows in Tab. 2). In Sec. 2.2.2, we demonstrate via
profiling that this depends on the sequence length: with short se-
quence lengths, the projection layers dominate, making the overall
complexity of the encoder block 𝑂(𝑙); with long sequence lengths,
however, the act-to-act matmuls dominate, making the overall com-
plexity 𝑂(𝑙2).

Summary (Sec. 2.1. Transformer Overview)
Transformers are composed of several Transformer blocks,
each of which has an MHA (multi-head attention module
and an FFN (feed-forward network) module (along with
LayerNorm and residual addition after each module). The
MHA module contains projection layers as well as act-to-act
matmuls and Softmax operations. The FFN module consists
of two projection layers with a nonlinear function between
them. There are two types of Transformer blocks: encoder
blocks and decoder blocks. Encoder blocks process the en-
tire input sequence in parallel, making them suitable for
natural language understanding tasks. Decoder blocks are
autoregressive, meaning that inference must be performed
once per generated output token, and are therefore typically
used in generative tasks.

2.2
Model Analysis

Decoder Block. In contrast to encoder-only models, the decoder-
only models [22, 173, 174] that consist of repeated decoder blocks
are auto-regressive in nature. This means that the output at a given
time step is based on the outputs in the previous time steps. In
other words, the model predicts a token in a sentence based on
the previous tokens it has generated so far, and the inference must
therefore be performed sequentially and iteratively, once for each
output token. For instance, if the previously generated sequence
is “I am a”, the model takes this as input and may predict the next
token “student”. Then, in the next time step, the input to the model
becomes “I am a student”. Therefore, the decoder-only structure
is suitable for natural language generation tasks. It is important
to note that, in decoder-only models, the input prompt tokens
can be consumed in parallel before the model begins to generate
subsequent tokens. For this work, we only consider open-ended
generation (i.e., assuming no input prompt).
Unlike the encoder block, which operates on the entire input
sequence, the decoder block is inferred one token at a time. This
results in a sequence length of one for each time step. In the case of
the projection layers, each token is independent of the previously
generated token. Thus, the projection operations are solely applied
to the input token, resulting in a matrix-vector multiplication and
a constant cost. However, this does not hold for the act-to-act
matmuls, as the input token is not independent of the previously
generated tokens. Instead, it is required to attend to all of them.

2.2.1
Workload Analysis. In order to evaluate bottlenecks in
Transformer, we first modelled the number of floating-point opera-
tions (FLOPs) required to compute the Transformer encoder-only
and decoder-only models, as well as the arithmetic intensity of these
networks. Arithmetic intensity is the number of floating point oper-
ations that can be performed per byte loaded from memory. It can
be computed by dividing the total number of FLOPs by the total
number of bytes accessed (also referred to as MOPs, or memory
operations) [227]:

Arithmetic Intensity = # FLOPs

# MOPs .
(1)

Here, we are assuming that the local memories are large enough to
hold both matrices entirely in memory for a given operation, and
that the computed arithmetic intensity values therefore serve as an
upper bound for the achievable data reuse. We are also counting
the multiplication and addition from a MAC operation separately
when computing FLOPs.

End-to-end FLOPs and MOPs. For the encoder analysis, we
used the 12-layer BERT-Base model and the 24-layer BERT-Large
network (see Tab. 1 for model configurations); and for the decoder,
we used the 12-layer GPT-2 model architecture which has the same
model configuration parameters as BERT-Base. For the purposes
of analysis, we ignored the maximum input sequence lengths of

507.8
MOPs of Transformer Models

FLOPs of Transformer Models

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

500

3942

4000

400

3000

GFLOPs

GMOPs

300

2000

214.3

1554

200

1324

1012

1000

97.3

100

673

505

428

46.2

310

29.9
11.1
22.5

22
46
97
214

22
45
92
194

73
149

0.1
0.2
0.4
1.1
3.2
11.2
0.4
0.6
1.2
2.9
8.7

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

Figure 4: Plot of the FLOPs for the BERT-Base and BERT-Large en-
coders and the GPT-2 decoder across different sequence lengths. The
FLOPs scales quadratically with sequence length due to quadratic
scaling in the act-to-act matmuls as well as the Softmax function.
Additionally, inferring the BERT-Base encoder and the GPT-2 decoder
(which have the same model architecture) requires a similar number
of FLOPs for processing the same sequence length.

Figure 5: Plot of the MOPs for the BERT-Base and BERT-Large en-
coders and the GPT-2 decoder across different sequence lengths. The
MOPs scale quadratically with sequence length for the encoder-only
models due to quadratic scaling in the act-to-act matmuls as well
as the Softmax function. Additionally, the GPT-2 decoder requires a
much greater number of MOPs than the BERT-Base encoder (which
have the same model architecture) for processing the same sequence
length as it loads weights per every token generation.

512 for standard BERT models throughout this section. We then
computed MOPs, the number of bytes that had to be accessed, when
inferring these models. We assumed 8-bit precision for all oper-
ations, meaning that loading one parameter or activation would
require loading one byte. For the decoder model, we measured
the FLOPs and MOPs as the total amount of floating point oper-
ations and memory operations needed to iteratively generate the
full sequence of the given length. The FLOPs and MOPs for these
networks for a range of sequence lengths are plotted in Fig. 4 and 5,
respectively. As one can see, FLOPs and MOPs scale super-linearly
for all models, especially in the long sequence length regime, due
to the quadratic complexity with respect to sequence length in the
act-to-act matmuls.

Arithemtic Intensity of Transformer Models

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

300

266

239

235

231

Arithmetic Intensity

215

202

200

179

171

160

156

131

117

100

2
2
2
2
2
2

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

End-to-end Arithmetic Intensity. We then modeled the arith-
metic intensity by dividing the number of FLOPs required when
inferring these models by the number of MOPs. The arithmetic
intensity for BERT-Base, BERT-Large, and GPT-2 versus sequence
length is shown in Fig. 6. For both BERT-Base and BERT-Large, the
arithmetic intensity initially increases with sequence length until
512 and then decreases afterwards for larger sequence lengths. The
reason for this is that, as will be analyzed in more detail in Sec. 2.2.2,
the FFN module that has higher arithmetic intensity than the MHA
module (Tab. 3) dominates the total FLOPs for small sequences
(Fig. 7). However, this trend reverses for larger sequence lengths, as
the cost of act-to-act matmuls in the MHA module grow quadrati-
cally with the increase in sequence length, leading to a reduction
in arithmetic intensity for the end-to-end model inference.
In comparison to encoder-only BERT inference, decoder-only
GPT-2 inference exhibits significantly lower arithmetic intensity.
This is due to the fact that the decoder is composed solely of matrix-
vector operations, which limits the opportunities for data reuse.
That said, for a single matrix-vector operation, we perform roughly
one multiplication and addition per parameter loaded since the

Figure 6: Plot of the arithmetic intensity of the BERT-Base and
BERT-Large encoders and the GPT-2 decoder across different sequence
lengths. The arithmetic intensity initially increases since the larger
matrix dimensions allow for more computations to be performed per
parameter loaded. However, at higher sequence lengths the arithmetic
intensity decreases. This is because, for the long sequence length, the
act-to-act matmuls, and Softmax computations of the MHA module
begin to dominate. These have relatively lower arithmetic intensity
compared to the projection layers in the FFN module.

loads cannot be shared across tokens. This leads to performing
roughly 2 operations per parameter loaded. It is important to note
that GPT-2 has fewer FLOPs than BERT-Base and BERT-Large as
the sequence length is increased. However, it is typically more
challenging to run its inference efficiently due to its low arithmetic
intensity. This makes its performance memory bandwidth-bound,
as compared to encoder-only BERT models. This behavior is also
characterized in depth by [166].

Table 3: Per-Layer FLOPs, memory operations (MOPs), and arithmetic intensity for the BERT-Base encoder with sequence lengths of 128, 512, and
4096 tokens. At low sequence lengths, the main contributors to both FLOPs and MOPs are the MHA and FFN projections. For longer sequence
lengths, the act-to-act matmuls consume a greater proportion of FLOPs, and these operations along with Softmax consume the majority of MOPs.
The act-to-act matmuls also have lower arithmetic intensity than the projection layers in the MHA and FFN for each sequence length.

Sequence Length
Operator
FLOPs (× 109)
% of total FLOPs
MOPs (× 109)
% of total MOPs
Arithmetic Intensity

MHA (projections)
7.25
32
0.04
27
192.00
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
0.60
3
0.006
7
63.62
FFN (projections)
14.50
65
0.07
49
211.86
Other
0.08
0.3
0.02
18
3.14
Total
22.42
100
0.14
100
159.68

128

MHA (projections)
28.99
30
0.07
16
438.86
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
9.62
10
0.09
20
101.95
FFN (projections)
57.98
60
0.10
25
558.54
Other
0.42
0.4
0.16
37
2.73
Total
97.02
100
0.42
100
231.0

512

MHA (projections)
231.93
18
0.33
3
702.17
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
616.02
46
4.98
44
123.63
FFN (projections)
463.86
35
0.43
4
1068.52
Other
11.85
1
5.47
49
2.16
Total
1323.66
100
11.22
100
117.96

4096

Table 4: Per-Layer FLOPs, memory operations (MOPs), and arithmetic intensity for ResNet50. Convolutions consume the dominant proportion of
FLOPs, but BatchNorm, ReLU, and the other operations contribute a significant proportion of MOPs.

Operator
FLOPs (× 109)
% of total FLOPs
MOPs (× 109)
% of total MOPs
Arithmetic Intensity

Convolution
7.26
99
0.04
36
183.36
BatchNorm
0.03
0.5
0.03
31
1.00
ReLU
0.008
0.1
0.02
15
0.50
Other
0.01
0.1
0.02
18
0.53
Total (Unfused)
7.31
100
0.11
100
66.94
Total (Fused)
7.28
100
0.06
100
121.36

a smaller number of heads (thus with a larger𝑑/ℎdimension) would
reduce the number of MOPs and improve the arithmetic intensity
of the act-to-act attentions in the MHA module. This suggests that,
when designing a Transformer architecture, the number of heads
can entail a trade-off between accuracy versus performance metrics
on hardware.
Additionally, Tab. 3 illustrates that while the nonlinear opera-
tions (classified as “Other” in the table) consume a small number
of overall FLOPs, they consume a significant proportion of MOPs,
especially for longer sequence lengths. Similar to the case of the
act-to-act matmuls, the large number of MOPs in the Softmax op-
erations for long sequence lengths is primarily due to several 𝑙×
𝑙matrices which must be either written out or loaded per atten-
tion head. This also indicates that the nonlinear activations, when
handled poorly, can become a noticeable contributor to the overall
performance, even though they might be overlooked due to their
insignificant contribution to total FLOPs. We provide a similar per-
layer analysis on the GPT-2 decoder in Tab. 11 of Appendix A.3,
which demonstrates the significantly reduced arithmetic intensity
across all layers, compared to the encoder-only model, resulting
from a large number of memory operations.

Per-Layer FLOPs, MOPs, and Arithmetic Intensity. We then
assessed the per-layer FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity ver-
sus sequence length for the BERT-Base encoder (Tab. 3). As shown
in Tab. 3, the proportion of FLOPs and MOPs consumed by the
act-to-act matmuls increases with sequence length, and these oper-
ations have lower arithmetic intensity compared to the projection
layers in the FFN and MHA modules. This explains the decrease
in overall arithmetic intensity of encoder-only models for long
sequence lengths, as observed in Fig. 6.
The low arithmetic intensity of the act-to-act matmuls relative
to the projection layers is because the 𝑑/ℎdimension in these two
operations is small relative to the dimensions for the projection
layers (𝑑and 𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁) and also relative to 𝑙, as the sequence length
is increased. Small matrix dimensions lead to lower arithmetic
intensity, as there are fewer operations to perform per element in
the matrix, leading to reduced reuse. The low arithmetic intensity is
further exacerbated with large activation sizes that must be loaded
and stored for the act-to-act matmuls. This activation size not only
grows quadratically with the sequence length 𝑙, but it is further
multiplied by the number of heads ℎsince each head has its own
activation (attention score) in the multi-head scheme. Therefore, as
shown in Tab. 10 in Appendix A.3, a hypothetical BERT model with

BERT-Base Latency Breakdown (CPU)

GPT-2 Latency Breakdown (CPU)

100

100

Percentage of Latency (%)

Percentage of Latency (%)

75

75

50

50

25

25

0

0

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

MHA (act-to-act)
MHA (proj.)
FFN (proj.)
Other

MHA (act-to-act)
MHA (proj.)
FFN (proj.)
Other

Figure 7: Plot of the computation breakdown in the BERT-Base en-
coder versus sequence length on a CPU. For smaller sequence lengths,
the projection layers in the MHA and FFN modules dominate the
model latency. However, for longer sequence lengths the act-to-act
matmuls begin to dominate.

Figure 8: Plot of the computation breakdown in the GPT-2 decoder
versus sequence length on a CPU. The projection layers in the MHA
and FFN modules dominate latency for shorter sequence lengths, but
for longer sequence lengths the act-to-act matmuls become more sig-
nificant. Note that nonlinear operations consume a more significant
portion of latency than in encoder inference.

2344
Normalized Latency of Transformer Models (CPU)

Comparison with ResNet50. To provide a baseline in terms of
the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for a typical CNN, we
also included a corresponding analysis of ResNet50 (architectural
details can be found in Appedix A.2). Tab. 4 provides a breakdown of
the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for ResNet50. Compared
to the BERT-Base encoder with a sequence length of 128 (Tab. 3),
ResNet50 without any operator fusion consumes 3.07 times fewer
FLOPs and 1.28 times fewer MOPs, resulting in lower end-to-end
arithmetic intensity than that of BERT-Base across all sequence
lengths in Tab. 3. The low arithmetic intensity is partially due to
the nonlinear operations in ResNet50 that consume a negligible
proportion of FLOPs yet a significant proportion of MOPs, similar to
the BERT-Base encoder. However, unlike the nonlinear operations
in Transformers, these operations in ResNet50 can be fused with
the preceding matmuls in a straightforward manner for inference.
In particular, the ReLU operations can be applied directly to the
accumulated outputs, and the BatchNorm operations can actually
be folded into the prior convolutions. Fusing ReLU eliminates the
MOPs for this operation, and folding BatchNorm eliminates both
the required FLOPs and MOPs for this operation. Broadly speaking,
operation fusion refers to a methodology in which the output values
from one operation (e.g., a matmul or convolution) are directly used
as input to the subsequent operation (e.g., a ReLU or BatchNorm)
without first writing the output values to off-chip memory. Operator
fusion eliminates the need for unnecessary memory loads and stores
for the nonlinear operations, and therefore it further improves
the end-to-end arithmetic intensity. As shown in Tab. 4, fusing
these operations with the prior convolutions improves the overall
arithmetic intensity for the ResNet-50 network from 66.9 to 121.4.
In Tab. 12 of Appendix A.4, we provide more detailed numbers for
the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity of several convolutional
layers in ResNet50 as a reference.
Note that arithmetic intensity provides a rough estimate of how
much data reuse is possible for different models and operations
in the ideal case. Later in Sec. 3.3, we will discuss that analytical

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

2000

Normalized Latency

1500

965

1000

500

427

218

201

45
93

1
2
3
9
25
84
3
6
10
26
72

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

Figure 9: Plot of the normalized latency of the BERT-Base and BERT-
Large encoders and the GPT-2 decoder versus sequence length on a
CPU, normalized to the latency of BERT-Base with a sequence length
of 128. The latency scales quadratically with respect to sequence length
for both encoder-only and decoder-only networks. Additionally, for
encoder-only and decoder-only networks with the same model archi-
tecture, the latency is significantly longer for the decoder-only network
due to its reduced arithmetic intensity.

modeling can provide a more accurate, non-ideal estimate by taking
account of the hardware details.

2.2.2
Profiling. To analyze the bottlenecks in Transformer work-
loads on commodity hardware, we profiled Transformer inference
on an Intel Gold 6242 CPU. We profiled the workload latency break-
down for both encoder-only BERT-Base and decoder-only GPT-2.

Latency breakdown. Fig. 7 and 8 demonstrate how the latency
breakdown changes with respect to sequence length on a CPU
for BERT-Base and GPT-2, respectively. These breakdowns illus-
trate that for short sequence lengths (e.g., 128-512), the majority

of computations are in the projection layers of the FFN module,
and that the majority of the MHA computation is in the projec-
tion layers. However, as sequence length increases, the act-to-act
matmuls begin to dominate, as they both scale quadratically with
sequence length.

3.1 then outlines the rationale of using domain specific acceler-
ators for DNNs as well as the basic architectures and dataflows
that are used in most DNN accelerators. Sec. 3.2 then highlights
existing work on accelerating Transformers. Sec. 3.3 then provides
analysis using an analytical model to assess how Transformers
run on a typical accelerator. Finally, Sec. 3.4 provides a case study
illustrating the process of building a typical accelerator for Trans-
formers. Overall, this section gives relevant performance analysis
and provides justification for the selected hardware decisions from
a full-stack perspective. Note that we are concerned here only with
efficiently inferring DNNs. In particular, designing hardware for
efficient model training is outside the scope of this paper.

End-to-end Latency. Fig. 9 shows the normalized latency for
different sequence lengths for BERT-Base, BERT-Large, and GPT-2.
It is evident that the GPT-2 latency is far longer than the latency
for either BERT-Base or BERT-Large for each sequence length,
even though BERT-Base and GPT-2 have largely the same model
configuration and end-to-end FLOPs (as was depicted in Fig. 4).
This is mostly due to the lower arithmetic intensity of matrix-
vector operations, which was highlighted in Fig. 6. A model with
higher arithmetic intensity can run faster with the same (or possibly
even more) FLOPs than a model with lower arithmetic intensity.
These observations confirm our findings that decoder inference
is a memory-bound problem and not a compute-bound problem.
We revisit this issue at Sec. 4.3.3 to discuss some of the existing
methodologies to speed up the decoding process.

3.1
Overview of Typical DNN Accelerators

A typical deep learning accelerator has a few key components, as
outlined in [27]:

• Off-chip DRAM used for holding the weights and activations
of the full network, which needs to be large enough to hold all
model weights and activations;
• Smaller on-chip memory, referred to here as the global buffer,
which needs to be large enough to hold a subset of the weights
and inputs in order to feed the processing elements (PEs);
• An array of PEs, each of which has the capability to perform
MAC operations, and which often contains one or more small
local memories called register files (RFs) that can store data with
lower per-access energy than the global buffer; and
• An internal network-on-chip (NoC) that transfers data between
PEs.

Summary (Sec. 2.2. Model Analysis): Here are the high-
level takeaways from this section.

• Both FLOPs and normalized latency scale super-linearly
with sequence length for all Transformer models due
to the quadratic complexity of the act-to-act matmuls.
However, this trend is less obvious with small sequence
lengths, where the main contributor to the overall com-
putation is the FFN, which scales linearly with sequence
length, rather than the MHA module (Fig. 4 and 9).
• For encoder-only models, arithmetic intensity initially
increases as the sequence length increases. However, it
decreases for larger sequences since the MHA module
(in particular, the act-to-act matmuls with lower arith-
metic intensity) becomes the dominant contributor to
total compute (Fig. 6).
• The arithmetic intensity of decoder-only models is sig-
nificantly lower than that of encoder-only models, lead-
ing to significantly longer end-to-end latency for the
same sequence length. This is due to the fact that de-
coder models involve matrix-vector operations with
limited data reuse, making them memory bandwidth-
bound rather than compute-bound (Fig. 6 and 9).
• Matmuls consume over 99% of the FLOPs in both
encoder-only and decoder-only models, and nonlin-
ear operations are a relatively small portion of over-
all FLOPs. However, the nonlinear operations have ex-
tremely low arithmetic intensity, especially for the large
sequence length, due to the large volume of activations
they need to load and store.

Fig. 10 shows the structure of a typical DNN accelerator. The
global buffer is designed to be able to hold a sufficient number of
the weights and activations in order to allow for data reuse and
limit the number of transfers to and from the off-chip DRAM. The
local memories in the PEs are used to provide local data reuse in
order to reduce global buffer accesses whenever possible. Without
reuse, MAC operation requires loading three parameters, the two
input values that are being multiplied as well as the current partial
sum (which is the partially accumulated value for a given location
in the output matrix), and then storing the output value back to
memory. This is important because memory reads and writes are
orders of magnitude more expensive from an energy perspective
[87]. For example, for one particular technology, reads from a local
buffer are roughly 6 times as expensive as a single MAC operation,
and reads from external DRAM are roughly 200 times as expensive
[206]. Leveraging reuse opportunities is therefore critical in order
to reduce the number of expensive memory accesses performed.
To maximize data reuse, there are two broad classes of dataflows
that are widely adopted, which are referred to as temporal and
spatial dataflows [27, 38, 206]. Temporal dataflows contain an array
of centrally-controlled PEs that load data from the global buffer
and perform the requested ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit) operations
before writing the data back to the global buffer. These PEs do not
contain local memories, and there is no communication or data
movement between PEs. Data reuse in this type of dataflow is only
attainable through weight or partial sum reuse in the global buffer.
Examples of temporal dataflows include Single-Instruction Multiple

3
HARDWARE DESIGN

So far, in Sec. 2, we have conducted an analysis of the run-time
characteristics and bottlenecks of Transformer architectures. We
now shift our focus to full-stack solutions for efficient Transformer
inference, beginning with the design of efficient hardware. Sec.

activations for the full network, and an internal network-on-
chip (NoC) can be used for transferring data between PEs.
DNN accelerators typically aim to leverage either temporal
dataflows (by performing the same operation in parallel on
several datapoints) or spatial dataflows (where data can be
transferred between PEs to leverage additional reuse op-
portunities). Spatial dataflow reuse schemes include weight
stationary dataflows, which hold weights in local memories
in the PEs to improve reuse.

PE Array

…

Local
Memory
DRAM

…

…

…

Figure 10: Basic structure of a DNN accelerator, assuming a spatial
dataflow between the Processing Elements (PEs) (inspired by [206]).

3.2
Adapting DNN Accelerators for
Transformers

There are several key considerations when designing DNN accel-
erators for Transformers or adapting existing CNN accelerators.
One difference between accelerators for CNNs and for Transform-
ers is that due to differences in terms of arithmetic intensity and
matrix dimensions, these models have different optimal sizes for
each level of the memory hierarchy as well as different memory
bandwidth requirements.
Another consideration is how the nonlinear functions are com-
puted during inference, which imposes an additional challenge in
hardware design. These operations require either specialized sup-
port for on-chip computation, or else they must be offloaded to the
CPU. In Sec. 3.4, we will outline how the nonlinear operations can
bottleneck inference even though they compose a small proportion
of model FLOPs, especially if they must be offloaded to the CPU.
Several accelerators for Transformer inference contain specialized
post-processing units for nonlinear functions [107, 148, 166, 209].
However, adding an additional unit to support these operations
also increases the area of the accelerator. This tradeoff between sup-
porting these operations on-chip and accelerator area will be also
explored in Sec. 3.4. Additionally, it can be challenging to design the
hardware both to efficiently support the required nonlinear opera-
tions (e.g., Softmax and LayerNorm) and to support new nonlinear
operations in future DNNs.
There are also considerations around datapath design, depend-
ing on whether the accelerator is being designed for the MHA
module or for end-to-end Transformer inference. Accelerators spe-
cialized for the MHA module are designed to match the dataflow
of the MHA module, where all the operations are “fused” together,
thus having less flexibility but better performance by reducing the
number of required memory accesses [64, 79, 80, 223, 237, 253].
Recall that operation fusion refers to using the output values from
one operation (e.g., a matmul) directly as input to the following
operation (e.g., a Softmax layer) without writing the intermedi-
ate values to off-chip memory. Several accelerators for the MHA
module develop dedicated datapaths with separate units for the
query × key, Softmax, and attention score × value operations in
order to better leverage operator-level fusion. In contrast, accel-
erators for end-to-end Transformer inference typically employ a
similar structure to Gemmini [70] (which is outlined in more detail
in Sec. 3.4) where they are designed to be more flexible by per-
forming individual operations separately in a more general matmul
engine [107, 148, 166, 209]. These accelerators also aim to fuse oper-
ations whenever possible to improve performance (for example, by

Data (SIMD) and Single-Instruction Multiple Thread (SIMT) execu-
tion units. These type of units are commonly used in both CPUs
and GPUs for vector processing. In temporal architectures, fully-
connected and convolutional layers are both mapped as matrix-
matrix multiplication operations.
In spatial dataflows, the PEs can communicate and data can be
moved between PEs to leverage data reuse, without repeated reads
from the global buffer. The PEs themselves often contain RFs to
hold weights or partial sums locally to improve data reuse, and
additional reuse can be attained through passing data between
adjacent PEs. Spatial dataflows are commonly used in FPGA and
ASIC-based accelerators, especially for convolutional networks [38].
These dataflows allow for data reuse across multiple dimensions
in order to drastically reduce the required memory accesses. In
order to maximize reuse in spatial dataflows, several different reuse
schemes have been employed:

• Weight stationary dataflows minimize the number of reads re-
quired for weight matrices by keeping weights in the local RFs
in PEs and streaming through inputs [72];
• Output stationary dataflows minimize energy from reading and
writing partial sums by accumulating the outputs in the local
RFs in the PEs [59];
• No local reuse dataflows have no RF in each PE, and use the
area savings from having no RFs to allocate a larger global
buffer [34]; and
• Row stationary dataflows maximize reuse for both partial sums
and weights by holding a row of the weights stationary in a
row of the PEs, streaming in inputs, and streaming out partial
sums [35].

Note that since DNNs consist of sequences of layers, it is also
possible to fuse operations in order to further leverage data reuse
across multiple layers. We encourage the reader to refer to Section V
of [206], Sections IV-A and IV-B of [49], and Sections III-A to III-C of
[27] for more comprehensive surveys and comparisons of the basic
architecture of a DNN accelerator and typical accelerator dataflows.

Summary (Sec. 3.1. Accelerating Neural Networks):
Typical DNN accelerators consist of on-chip memory for
holding a subset of model weights and inputs and an array
of processing elements (PEs) which can perform MAC op-
erations. Off-chip DRAM is used for holding weights and

applying Softmax directly to the accumulated outputs of a matmul
before writing them out). However, the entire graph-level dataflow
is not hardcoded in hardware as in MHA-specific accelerators.
In both cases, there are dataflow considerations for nonlinear
function unit placement. This is because, as we have demonstrated
in 2.2, non-linear operations generally have a high number of MOPs
despite their small FLOPs count, and therefore the overall arithmetic
intensity can be improved upon through operator fusion (as in the
ResNet50 case). In the case of accelerators for the MHA module,
in order to leverage operator-level fusion in the MHA module,
the Softmax unit must be placed appropriately such that it can
be computed after the query × key multiplication and before the
attention score × value multiplication. For example, [64] places the
Softmax unit in between specialized units for the query × key and
attention score × value multiplications, and it computes LayerNorm
in a separate hardware module. Placing functional units to support
operator fusion provides higher efficiency, but this comes at a cost
of less flexibility since the architecture now makes assumptions
about the operator-level dataflow.

Parameter
Default Value

L2 ↔DRAM BW
64 bytes/cycle

DRAM

Local Memory
↔L2 Bandwidth

16 bytes/cycle

L2 Size
2 MB

Scratchpad Size
256 kB

Accumulator Size
128 kB

PE Array (W x W)

PE Unit Width W
16

SFU Width S
16

L2

Scratchpad

Clock Frequency
1 GHz

Accumulator

Input Precision
8

Output Precision
32

S-Wide Special
Function Unit (SFU)

Blue Arrows – External Memory Traffic
Green Arrows – Internal Data Movement

Figure 11: Diagram of the structure of the basic analytical perfor-
mance model, as well as the parameters that were varied in this
analysis.

DNN accelerators, with the notable assumption that the included
special function unit (SFU) is able to compute all required nonlinear
operations, and thus none of these operations have to be computed
off-chip. The model also assumes 𝑊-cycle latency for the PE array,
where𝑊is the width of the PE array, and 1-cycle latency per vector
for the SFU.

Summary (Sec. 3.2. Adapting DNN Accelerators for
Transformers): Accelerators for Transformers and CNNs
have different optimal sizes for the memory hierarchy as
well as different memory bandwidth requirements. Accel-
erators for the MHA module tend to design hardened data-
paths to exploit operator fusion. End-to-end Transformer
accelerators tend not to design their datapath around the
graph-level dataflow in the MHA module. Transformer ac-
celerators tend to incorporate a post-processing unit to
compute nonlinear functions efficiently on-chip.

Latency Breakdown and End-to-end Latency. One useful sce-
nario of analytical modeling is to obtain the estimated latency break-
down and end-to-end runtime latency. As an example, we applied
analytic modeling to the BERT-Base and BERT-Large encoders as
well as the GPT-2 decoder, under the assumption of square tiling for
all matrix operations and no operation fusion (i.e., each operation
required inputs to be read from external memory and outputs to be
flushed out). In Appendix A.5, we provide the latency breakdowns
for BERT-Base and GPT-2 (Fig. 30 and 31, respectively) as well as the
end-to-end runtime latency of all models with different sequence
lengths (Fig. 32). In general, the results of the analytical model
show similar trends in runtime latency scaling and breakdowns as
compared with the profiling results on the CPU in Sec. 2.2.2, only
with slight differences in details. Note that the analytical model
was designed assuming a hardware architecture that was different
from the CPU architecture, and therefore the runtime behaviors
would not necessarily be identical for different hardware platforms.
More details can be found in Appendix A.5, including a comparison
with the analytic modeling results on ResNet50.

3.3
Analytical Modelling

Analytic modeling is a useful tool for identifying bottlenecks when
inferring DNN benchmarks, as it provides a quick estimate of run-
time behaviors on the target hardware platform. At design time, it
can be quite difficult to analyze the runtime behaviors of benchmark
workloads as well as the potential impacts of hardware architectural
changes on performance. This contrasts with the case in Sec. 2.2.2
where profiling can be conducted directly on actual hardware (e.g.,
CPUs). In cases where profiling is difficult or infeasible, analytical
modeling can provide estimates to quickly guide design decisions.
Here, we developed an analytical model to demonstrate how
it can be useful in understanding the performance breakdown
of Transformer inference on hardware accelerators. Our analytic
model is based off of the Gemmini-driven architecture [70], which
will be outlined in more detail in Section 3.4.1. Its structure is il-
lustrated in Fig. 11, along with the tunable parameters. The model
includes local memories, a PE array for computing tiled matrix-
matrix multiplications, and it relies on external memory for storing
all model parameters. The performance estimates assume that com-
pute time and memory operation time can be overlapped perfectly,
and that the total for each operation is the maximum of these two.
Note that double buffering was assumed in the scratchpad to en-
sure that compute could be overlapped with memory reads/writes
wherever possible. The model structure is comparable to typical

Non-ideal Arithmetic Intensity. As with the analysis in Sec. 2.2,
arithmetic intensity provides a rough estimate of how much data
reuse is possible for different operations in the ideal case. However,
in real-world scenarios, such as when tiling operations are required
due to the size of the matrices exceeding the capacity of the local
scratchpad, the arithmetic intensity will be further reduced. In such
a case, analytic modeling can provide a more accurate estimate,
namely non-ideal arithmetic intensity, by taking into account the
hardware details. To take the tiling effect into account, we counted
DRAM to L2 memory traffic in our analytical modeling, but not
L2 to Scratchpad, in order to avoid double counting. Furthermore,
we assume 32-bit output precision before the nonlinear operations,
since it is known that low input precision (e.g., 8-bit) to those op-
erations can result in a considerable accuracy degradation [111].
The non-ideal arithmetic intensities for different operations in the

Table 5: Non-ideal arithmetic intensity for the BERT-Base encoder with sequence lengths of 128, 512, and 4096 tokens. The non-ideal arithmetic
intensity is lower than the ideal arithmetic intensities (provided in Tab. 3) due to using 32-bit output precision before nonlinear operations as well
as constraints from the memory sizes. Note that the differences in non-ideal arithmetic intensity between the 𝑊𝑄, 𝑊𝐾, 𝑊𝑉projections and the
𝑊out projection with the same operation dimensions are due to differences in output precision – 𝑊out is followed by nonlinear operations, and
therefore it uses 32-bit instead of 8-bit.

Sequence Length
𝑊𝑄, 𝑊𝐾, 𝑊𝑉projections
Q × K
Attn. score × V
𝑊out projection
𝑊1 projection
𝑊2 projection
Total

128
170.670
25.400
63.750
128.000
130.723
186.182
106.110
512
341.333
29.882
102.300
204.800
211.862
409.6
111.122
4096
409.6
30.788
118.710
227.556
236.308
512.000
47.067

Gemmini

CPU

BERT-Base encoder are provided in Tab. 5 for sequence lengths of
128, 512, and 4096.
Compared to the ideal arithmetic intensity that we have dis-
cussed in Sec. 2.2.1 (Fig. 6), which is 160, 231, and 118 for each
sequence length, we observe significant reductions in the non-ideal
arithmetic intensity. This is due to the effects of tiling as well as the
large 32-bit output activations which must be loaded and stored
before the nonlinear operations. The gap becomes even larger with
a large sequence length (up to 2.5× reduction for sequence length
4096), where the effect of loading and storing intermediate values
are more pronounced. This is different from the case of ResNet50,
whose non-ideal arithmetic intensity of 121.312 does not diverge a
lot from the ideal arithmetic intensity of 122.172. This also demon-
strates how even though the ideal arithmetic intensity of Trans-
formers was generally higher than that of ResNet50, the overall
achieved arithmetic intensity is lower for Transformers across all
sequence lengths.

Transposer

im2col

Controller

RoCC Cmd

Core

Dependency Mgmt

RoCC PTW

DMA Engine

Spatial
Array

L1 I+D

Local TLB

Scratchpad

L2

++++++
Accumulator
SRAM

Bank 0

ReLU

…

Bitshi

Matrix Scalar
Multiplier
Pooling
Engine

Bank K

DRAM

Figure 12: Baseline accelerator’s hardware architectural overview.

ResNet50-like workloads, and we discuss changes we made to this
accelerator and it’s software stack to efficiently support transformer
workloads such as BERT. Several accelerators for end-to-end Trans-
former inference employ a similar structure to Gemmini and to our
analytical model and also contain specialized post-processing units
for nonlinear functions [107, 148, 166, 209].

Summary (Sec. 3.3. Analytical Modeling): Analytical
modeling is a useful tool for identifying bottlenecks and
runtime characteristics of DNN inference on a target hard-
ware platform. This technique can be especially useful dur-
ing the design phase, where profiling on actual hardware
can be difficult, yet the analysis is necessary in order to
make design decisions. We provided examples of using an-
alytic modeling to obtain latency breakdown and non-ideal
arithmetic intensity. In detail, we have demonstrated that
the non-ideal arithmetic intensity of the Transformer can
be further reduced (up to 2.5×) compared to the ideal case
when the hardware constraints and implementation details
are taken into account.

3.4.1
Baseline Accelerator. We first generate a fairly typical
CNN accelerator, which is illustrated in Fig. 12, using the Gemmini
accelerator-generator. The accelerator performs matmuls using
a 16×16 systolic array, which implements the weight-stationary
dataflow. When performing convolutions, the dimensions of the
output-channels and input-channels are spatially unrolled. The 8-
bit integer weights and inputs are stored in a 256 kB local scratchpad
memory, and the 32-bit partial sums are stored in a dual-ported
64 kB accumulator SRAM which performs matrix additions. When
DNN layers are too large to fit into the local scratchpad, they fall
back onto an external L2 cache and DRAM which are shared with
CPUs and other accelerators on the system-on-chip (SoC). A host
CPU tiles such layers to compute the full outputs.
Although most of a CNN’s FLOPs are used to compute matmuls
or convolutions, our baseline Gemmini-generated accelerator also
contains peripheral circuitry to execute ReLU and max-pool op-
erations, as well as integer-float multipliers to scale 32-bit partial
sums to 8-bit inputs that can be fed into the next layer in a CNN.
Native support for these operations is important, as it eliminates
the need for costly transfers back and forth between DRAM or
outer caches (where the CPU can perform these operations) and
the local scratchpad (where Gemmini stores its matrix operands).
Finally, note that this baseline CNN accelerator does not include
any Transformer-specific features. In particular, there is no sup-
port for non-linear normalization operations such as LayerNorm

3.4
Case Study: Building a Transformer
Accelerator

We now illustrate with a more “hands-on” example how architects
familiar with mainstream accelerators for convolutional, vision-
based workloads can design state-of-the-art transformer accelera-
tors. Although the analytical model in Sec. 3.3 presents ideal latency
and runtime predictions for Transformer inferences, approaching
the ideal performance and efficiency in real-world hardware accel-
erators can take considerable engineering effort, which we explore
here. We start with a fairly typical CNN accelerator generated by
the Gemmini [70] accelerator-generator, optimized primarily for

module in Tab. 3. This suggests that the memory hierarchy and
memory bandwidth of our baseline CNN accelerator should be
re-tuned for more efficient Transformer inference.

Accumulator size (kB)

66%
71%
69%

64

3.4.3
Memory Hierarchy. Transformer matmuls (in particular,
the act-to-act matmuls) often have very different shapes and arith-
metic intensities than the convolutional layers in CNNs, as also
illustrated in Tab. 3 and 4. As illustrated in Fig. 13, simply adjusting
the sizes of the input/weight scratchpad and 32-bit partial accumu-
lator significantly improves the performance of BERT’s matmul
operations. Larger accumulators enable higher output-reuse, which
is more suited for several of the matmuls in Transformers. The
query × key matmuls in particular have 𝑙× 𝑙output activation
matrices, which for long sequence lengths are much larger than the
𝑙× 𝑑/ℎinput query and key matrices. Increasing the accumulation
buffer size therefore allows for improved output reuse with these
operations.
Given this observation, we reduce the size of our baseline accel-
erator’s shared input/weight scratchpad to 64 kB from 256kB, and
we increase the size of the partial-sum accumulator to 256 kB from
64kB. This involves no increase in the total SRAM capacity and
virtually no change to the total area of our accelerator. However,
these changes yield a much more substantial 36% reduction in total
matmul latency.

91%
91%
88%

128

91%
91%
90%

256

64
128
256
Input/weight scratchpad size (kB)

Figure 13: The matmul utilization while performing a BERT-base
inference on our baseline CNN accelerator, with different scratchpad
and accumulator sizes.

or Softmax. Neither is there support for GELU, which is a rela-
tively expensive non-linear activation function often implemented
with costly lookup tables. Instead, this baseline design is a typical
example of an accelerator designed and optimized for quantized
integer CNN inference. It achieves real-time or near-real-time per-
formance on end-to-end CNN workloads such as ResNet50 [82],
SqueezeNet [93], or MobileNetV2 [188], but (we will see that) the
performance on Transformer workloads such as BERT is severely
limited due to the need to perform operations such as GELU, Lay-
erNorm, and Softmax on the CPU.

3.4.4
Hardware-Software Co-Design. As described in Sec. 3.3,
matmuls are the dominant kernel in Transformer workloads, but
even after maximizing matmul performance on our baseline CNN
accelerator, it still fails to achieve above 1% utilization. This is due
to the overhead of CPU-offloaded non-linear operations. Fig. 14
demonstrates that this is because only 1% of time is actually spent on
matmuls. The rest is spent on floating-point non-linear activation,
normalizations, or on quantization and dequantization operations,
since they are offloaded to the CPU.
To alleviate the overhead of runtime quantization and dequan-
tization, we switched our baseline Transformer workload from a
naive BERT implementation, where only matmuls are quantized,
to an integer-only BERT variant called I-BERT [111]. More details
on quantization and I-BERT will be revisited in Sec. 4.1 and 4.3,
but the main idea of I-BERT is to replace floating-point nonlinear
operations such as GELU and Softmax with integer polynomial
approximations such that they are both faster and cheaper to im-
plement in specialized hardware accelerators.
To incorporate I-BERT, we added new integer implementations
of I-BERT’s GELU, LayerNorm, and Softmax variants to our baseline
CNN accelerator. The 32-bit matmul results resident in the accu-
mulator are fed into a newly added “normalization unit” which
computes sums, sums-of-squares, maxes, and other reductions
which are used by LayerNorm and Softmax. Multiple passes of
accumulator-reads are required to compute all the reductions in
these operations. For example, a sum is computed first before a vari-
ance is computed using that sum. Afterwards, the matmul results
in the accumulators are read one final time to be fed into a set of
16 activation units which compute I-BERT’s GELU, LayerNorm, or
Softmax variants in parallel.
With these new features, overall end-to-end BERT inference per-
formance improved by 39.6× over the baseline accelerator’s initial
performance. As Fig. 14 illustrates, the computational bottleneck

3.4.2
Performance Bottlenecks. Our baseline CNN accelerator
achieves far less than 1% utilization of its functional units when
performing BERT inferences. Although individual matmuls achieve
74% utilization, operations that the accelerator doesn’t support
natively, such as LayerNorm, significantly reduce performance as
they must be performed by the CPU instead. In fact, Fig. 14 shows
that 96% of execution is spent on non-matmul operations. Note
that over 99% of FLOPs in our Transformer inference are MACs for
matmuls, so the time consumed by each operation in the baseline
accelerator’s run is far from the theoretical ideal, unless further
optimizations are made.
Furthermore, our baseline accelerator offloads GELU and Soft-
max operations to the host CPU, which performs them with floating-
point units. As shown in Fig. 15, floating-point adders or multipliers
consume orders of magnitude more energy than the integer coun-
terparts. In our baseline CNN accelerator, matmuls are performed
with INT8 inputs, but these must be dequantized and requantized
in between matmul operations for floating-point activations to be
performed on the CPU, further contributing to the energy and
latency overhead.
Finally, a specialized hardware accelerator’s memory hierarchy
must often be carefully tuned based on the workloads running on it.
CNNs primarily perform convolutions,1 which have very high arith-
metic intensity, while Transformers primarily perform matmuls,
often with small and/or rectangular matrices, with significantly
lower arithmetic intensities and different optimal tiling strategies.
For example, we observe the low arithmetic intensities of the MHA

1Note that some CNN operations, such as “depthwise convolutions” in models such as
MobileNet [188], may also suffer from lower arithmetic intensities, but these operations
are found in only a subset of state-of-the-art CNNs, and often constitute only a small
portion of the total runtime of a vision model.

100

Percentage of Latency (%)

Matmul

75

1%
Softmax

GELU

Resadd
4%

19%

10%

LayerNorm
7%

50

LayerNorm
4%

Softmax
3%

87%

11%

25

Resadd

Matmul+GELU

49%

0

De/Quantization

128
256
512
Sequence Length

Matmul+GELU
LayerNorm
Resadd
Softmax

Figure 14: The time spent on different operations during a BERT inference with a sequence-length of 512, when running on (Left) the baseline
CNN accelerator, and (Middle) the accelerator after it has been extended with I-BERT’s hardware/software features for Transformers. Note that
with I-BERT support, quantization and dequantization operations are no longer required, because all operations happen in the integer format.
(Right) The time spent on different operations with different sequence lengths after the change. For all sequence lengths, the total execution time is
dominated by matmuls.

once again became the matmuls rather than normalization or acti-
vation functions; and this trend persists across different sequence
lengths. Quantization and dequantization no longer become nec-
essary, since the non-linear floating-point operations are replaced
with I-BERT’s integer polynomial approximations. Also note that
GELU operations can now be trivially fused with the preceding mat-
muls, so that they become one pipelined operation. When synthe-
sized with the ASAP7 PDK [45], the new hardware units increased
the total area consumption of the accelerator by only 14%, and the
GELU, LayerNorm, and Softmax operations increased the power
consumption of a BERT inference by only 9.3%.2

To address these issues, we:

• Reduced scratchpad capacity in favor of an increase in
accumulator size, which enabled higher output reuse
and improved memory efficiency;
• Switched to I-BERT, an integer version of BERT that ap-
proximates floating point activations, eliminating quan-
tization overhead; and
• Added special normalizer units and activation units that
offload GELU, LayerNorm and Softmax computations
from the CPU.
These changes mitigate the bottleneck on non-matmul op-
erations, and they trade a 14% area increase for a 39.6×
performance improvement. An important takeaway is that
even though the nonlinear operations in Transformers have
little contribution to the overall FLOPs, area, or power, they
can still have a non-trivial impact on latency.

To summarize, as shown in Sec. 3.3, the nonlinear operations
do not necessarily add much to the total FLOPs, area, or power
consumption of Transformer accelerators in the ideal case. How-
ever, this may not be the case in practice, especially if the com-
putation is offloaded to a CPU, leading to a non-trivial latency
impact. We demonstrated that this can be addressed using the I-
BERT implementations of LayerNorm, Softmax, and GELU, which
only increases the area of a Transformer accelerator by 5-15%, and
adds 8% to the total latency.

4
MODEL OPTIMIZATION

Given a DNN model that has already been designed and trained,
one important question is whether it is still possible to algorith-
mically improve the efficiency of the model on the target hard-
ware platform, through the adaptation of the model into a more
hardware-friendly format. In this section, we discuss popular off-
the-shelf model optimization methods, quantization and sparsity
(i.e., pruning), in Sec. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively. Then, in Sec. 4.3, we
outline Transformer-specific optimization methods to improve the
performance of Transformer-specific features such as attentions
and nonlinear operations.

Summary (Sec. 3.4. Accelerator for Transformers
Case Study): The baseline Gemmini accelerator designed
for CNN architectures uses 8-bit integer weights, and it
has an accumulator for partial sum storage as well as a
small scratchpad that overflows to an external L2 cache.
The performance of running Transformers on the baseline
accelerator suffers for a number of reasons.

• The bottleneck non-matmul operations running on the
CPU takes 96% of total runtime;
• Activation functions performed in floating point require
repeated dequantization and requantization; and
• The lower arithmetic intensity nature of transformer
inference is more sensitive to non-optimized memory
hierarchy.

4.1
Quantization

DNN models are typically trained using high-precision floating-
point computations. However, high-precision arithmetic is often
unnecessary for inference. Quantization is a procedure for compress-
ing DNN models by representing parameters and/or activations
with a lower-bit, typically (but not necessarily) fixed-point repre-
sentation such as 8-bit integer (INT8), instead of 32-bit or 16-bit
floating point (FP32 or FP16).

2Note that the ASAP7 PDK does not include energy models for SRAMs, so to derive
the total energy consumption of our accelerator, we used the SRAM energy estimates
in Accelergy’s [231] CACTI [159] plugin, and scaled them for 7nm.

Relative Energy Cost
Relative Area Cost

Area(μm𝟐):
36
67
137
1360
4184
282
3495
1640
7700
N/A
N/A

Operation:
Energy(pJ):
8b Add
0.03
16b Add
0.05
32b Add
0.1
16b FP Add
0.4
32b FP Add
0.9
8b Mult
0.2
32b Mult
3.1
16b FP Mult
1.1
32b FP Mult
3.7
32b SRAM Read (8kb)5.0
32b DRAM Read
640

1
10
100
1000 10000
1
10
100
1000

Figure 15: (Left) Comparison between peak throughput for different bit-precision logic on Titan RTX and A100 GPU. (Right) Comparison of
the corresponding energy cost and relative area cost for different precision for 45nm technology [87]. As one can see, lower precision provides
exponentially better energy efficiency and higher throughput.

in Sec. 3.4.4 that integer-only quantization reduces the end-to-end
inference latency by 39.6× on Gemmini.
Quantization methods can broadly be categorized into uniform
and non-uniform quantization, depending on how they map the
values. Uniform quantization splits the floating-point domain into
evenly spaced intervals and maps each interval into a single fixed
point value. This can be obtained from a simple arithmetic rule:

Quantization offers multiple benefits for efficient DNN inference.
One obvious advantage of reduced precision is the reduction in
memory consumption. For example, quantizing model weights from
FP32 to INT8 leads to a 4× smaller model size. This leads to reduced
off-chip storage and bandwidth without any modifications to a DNN
accelerator. Additionally, quantizing activations further allows for
reduced memory traffic and storage for intermediate partial results.
The memory hierarchy can also be restructured accounting for
the precision difference, either by allowing for greater local reuse
by storing a larger number of parameters (since each parameter
now consumes less storage space), or else by using smaller internal
buffers while maintaining the same amount of local data reuse.
A second advantage of quantizing model weights and activa-
tions is the reduced size, latency, and energy consumption of the
ALUs and the corresponding PEs. In general, floating point ALUs
tend to be less efficient than integer ALUs in terms of area, latency,
and energy consumption. This is because floating-point PEs need
to multiply mantissas, add exponents, and perform a left shift us-
ing the exponent to get the final result when performing a single
multiplication operation, whereas fixed-point PEs only require a
multiplication unit. For this reason, modern GPUs and TPUs often
contain INT8 processing paths [43, 100], which can significantly
benefit from quantization. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 15,
performing INT8 addition can be ∼30× more energy efficient and
∼120× more area efficient, as compared to the FP32 counterpart.
Another critical application for quantization is model deploy-
ment on integer-only hardware. Some edge processors for low-
cost and power-efficient embedded devices such as ARM Cortex-M
cores [12] and GAP-8 [66] do not include dedicated floating point
units. When deploying models on these processors, not only must
the model weights and activations be quantized, but also all compu-
tations must be conducted using only integer arithmetic. Otherwise,
deployment is impossible or results in considerable overhead due to
the need to process non-integer operations off-chip. This would lead
to additional latency and energy consumption for data transfer to a
general-purpose host processor. This quantization technique of car-
rying out the entire inference using integer arithmetic is known as
integer-only quantization [97, 110, 111, 132, 241]. We have discussed

𝑄(𝑟) = Int(𝑟/𝑠) + 𝑍,
(2)

where 𝑄is the quantization operation, 𝑟is the floating point value,
𝑆is a scaling factor, and 𝑍is a shift factor. Non-uniform quantiza-
tion, on the other hand, does not require the intervals to be evenly
spaced. By assigning more quantization bins to important regions,
generally resulting in improved compression rates, non-uniform
quantization can more accurately capture the original data distri-
bution in the floating point domain than uniform quantization.
However, it is typically more challenging to efficiently deploy non-
uniformly quantized models on general computation hardware. As
a result, uniform quantization is currently the de-facto method for
its simplicity and efficient mapping to hardware.
While lower bit quantization can lead to a better compression
rate, reducing the precision too aggressively can significantly de-
grade the model accuracy. It is therefore crucial to achieve a balance
between performance gains through reduced precision and main-
taining model accuracy. One promising strategy for alleviating this
issue is mixed-precision quantization. It is known from previous
work [55, 195, 224, 229] that different layers in a model exhibit differ-
ent sensitivity to quantization, and that it is critical to assign higher
bit precision to the more sensitive layers. Notable works for quan-
tizing Transformers with mixed-precision include Q-BERT [195]
that uses the Hessian information (i.e., curvature) as a proxy for
sensitivity, and HAT [222] that applies reinforcement learning (RL)
to learn the appropriate bit precision per layer.
Another challenge with quantizing pre-trained Transformer
models is the presence of outliers in activations [117]. Uniform
quantization, which attempts to divide the range from the mini-
mum possible value to the maximum possible value into multiple
bins, can result in significant performance degradation. This is be-
cause more values are mapped to the same quantized value (i.e.,

resolution degradation) due to the outliers that extend the interval
of each quantization bin. While non-uniform quantization can be
a solution to circumvent the outlier issue [246], a uniform quan-
tization scheme that assigns larger bit precisions to activations
containing outliers has been proposed as well [51]. Furthermore,
the recently introduced FP8 precision [156], which provides extra
degrees of freedom in setting the exponent bit precision, has been
found to be a suitable solution for quantizing models whose integer
quantization results in reduced accuracy due to the presence of
outliers [121].
For more information about this topic, see Section III-F of [27],
Section IV-C-3 of [49], and Section 3.1 of [13], as well as [71] for a
more comprehensive survey of software-level approaches.

order to store the data effectively without storing the null (i.e., zero)
parameters, a compressed memory format is necessary. Addition-
ally, the computation units must be adjusted to be able to operate
directly on the compressed data. Otherwise, the parameters must
be decompressed before computations and then re-compressed
afterward, leading to additional overhead. For these reasons, com-
modity DNN accelerators might not efficiently exploit unstructured
sparsity patterns.
Structured pruning circumvents these limitations by strictly re-
moving structured sets of parameters. For instance, in Transform-
ers, rows and columns in linear layers, attention heads [155], or
even entire layers [63, 186] can be structurally pruned. Recent
work has further integrated the structured pruning of different
architectural components into a single framework (e.g., pruning
attention heads in MHA modules and filters in FFN modules to-
gether) [88, 123, 145, 233]. Such structured pruning methodologies
immediately lead to dense matmuls that are smaller than the orig-
inal, eliminating the need for a compressed memory format or
special hardware support to gain memory reduction and latency
improvement. However, the compression rate might not be as good
as with unstructured pruning. It has been shown that a state-of-
the-art unstructured pruning method [120] can prune up to 90% of
the parameters in BERT [52] without any performance drop on the
MNLI benchmark [226], whereas the same performance can only be
achieved with a state-of-the-art structured pruning method [233]
by pruning up to 70% of the parameters.
While the aforementioned pruning methods belong to weight
pruning, activation pruning (i.e., dynamic pruning) can also be ap-
plied to dynamically detect and zero out unimportant activations at
run-time. In Transformer inference, a popular branch of activation
pruning is token pruning [74, 108, 113, 150, 223], which detects and
drops less important tokens in each Transformer layer from the rest
of the inference. The underlying rationale is that not all tokens (e.g.,
words in NLP tasks) are necessary to understand the meaning of the
input sequence. By reducing the sequence length that Transformers
need to process, these methods have demonstrated a reduction of up
to ∼30−50% in the total number of computations required, without
causing a noticeable drop in accuracy in NLP benchmarks [181, 220].
However, accelerating such dynamic sparsity patterns can be a chal-
lenge, as it requires detection logic to determine the location of
nonzeros on-the-fly. Therefore, in many cases, dynamic sparsity
requires designing algorithm and hardware together.
Regardless of the pruning methodologies used, the primary con-
cern is determining which weights should be preserved and which
should be removed in order to improve the efficiency of the neural
network without sacrificing its performance. Common methodolo-
gies for pruning Transformers include the following:

Summary (Sec. 4.1. Quantization): Quantization is a way
of compressing DNN models by reducing the precision of
model parameters and/or activations. The immediate bene-
fit of quantization is reduced memory consumption, which
allows reduced off-chip storage and bandwidth, and a more
efficient memory hierarchy design. Furthermore, quantiza-
tion can reduce the size, latency, and energy consumption
of the ALUs and the corresponding PE via low-bit preci-
sion arithmetic. In some cases, quantization also makes it
possible to deploy DNN models in integer-only hardware
units, which otherwise may be impossible or may incur con-
siderable overhead for offloading non-integer operations
off-chip. While many DNN models are robust to a certain
level of quantization noise, certain algorithm-level advance-
ments are necessary to prevent accuracy degradation with
lower-bit precision (e.g., INT4 or even less). In particular,
special considerations must be taken for quantizing pre-
trained Transformers without accuracy degradation as they
are known to have outlier activations.

4.2
Sparsity

Another common avenue for reducing the overall number of compu-
tations required for deep learning inference is through introducing
sparsity. Sparsity (also known as pruning) is a procedure of mak-
ing DNN models sparse by removing those redundant/insensitive
parameters. While it has been observed that having a dense model
may be necessary to successfully train a model, it is also possible to
remove many of the parameters after the model has been trained,
without any quality degradation. It is known that training large
models and then compressing them via pruning achieves better
accuracy then training a compressed model from scratch [133]. This
may be due to the fact that having redundant parameters from the
beginning of the training may make the loss landscape easier to
optimize [139]; or it may be related to the increase in the likelihood
of obtaining a “lottery ticket” [67].
Broadly speaking, pruning can be categorized into two branches:
unstructured pruning; and structured pruning. Unstructured prun-
ing allows arbitrary patterns of sparsification for parameters and
feature maps. It can, in theory, produce significant computational
savings without accuracy degradation [136]. However, unstructured
pruning can be challenging to leverage effectively in hardware. In

• Magnitude pruning [68] is a technique that uses the absolute
value of each weight as a proxy for its importance. It prunes
the weights with the smallest magnitudes during the training
process. The rationale behind this approach is that smaller
weights contribute less to the model’s final outcome.
• Movement pruning [124, 189] is a technique that takes into
account the changes in weights during fine-tuning, assigning a
larger importance score to the weights that move further away
from zero as the fine-tuning process progresses. This technique

We refer interested readers to Section V of [47] and Section III of
[27] for a more comprehensive overview of sparse encoding meth-
ods. Additionally, a general overview of hardware architectures
that leverage various sparsity patterns is provided in [47].

has been found to be more effective than magnitude pruning for
models that are trained using the pre-training and fine-tuning
scheme (e.g., BERT [52]), as it better captures the importance
of weights as the fine-tuning process progresses.
• First-order pruning [155] uses gradients with respect to the loss
that flow into the weights or a group of weights as a proxy
for evaluating the importance of the model accuracy. This ap-
proach considers the gradient to be an indicator of the impact
of zeroing out a parameter on the loss. This scheme was further
improved [88], where the product of weight magnitude and
gradient was used as a proxy for importance, as it may be a
more accurate estimate of the impact of zeroing out weights.
• Second-order pruning [120, 123, 245] uses the Hessian matrix of
the weights or a group of weights with respect to the loss as a
proxy importance metric. Compared to the first-order informa-
tion, the second-order information is generally known to be a
more accurate indicator of the effect of removing weights. How-
ever, due to the large size of the Hessian matrix, which grows
quadratically with the number of weights, it is necessary to
employ an appropriate and scalable approximation, often with
algorithms from randomized numerical linear algebra [57, 242].

Summary (Sec. 4.2. Sparsity): Sparsity (or pruning) is an-
other widely-used method of reducing the inference cost of
overparameterized DNN models by removing redundant or
less important weights and activations. Similar to quantiza-
tion, pruning helps to reduce off-chip memory consumption
and the corresponding memory traffic, as well as energy
consumption and latency. Pruning can be broadly divided
into weight pruning and activation pruning. Weight prun-
ing can be further divided into unstructured pruning, which
allows any sparsity pattern, and structured pruning, which
imposes an additional constraint on the sparsity pattern.
While structured pruning can provide benefits in terms of
memory, energy consumption, and latency without addi-
tional hardware support, it is known to achieve less com-
pression rate than unstructured pruning. Activation prun-
ing prunes redundant activations during inference, which
can be especially effective for Transformer models. How-
ever, this requires support to dynamically detect and zero
out unimportant activations at run-time.

One of the main advantages of pruning is the reduction in mem-
ory footprint. The gain in memory efficiency is straightforward
with structured pruning, which directly reduces the size and/or
number of matrix multiplications. In contrast, unstructured pruning
often requires the use of sparse encodings (also known as sparse
storage formats) to compress and store sparse data. These methods
use less memory by employing metadata to encode the positions
of the nonzero entries in the matrices [27, 47]. Sparse encodings
can reduce off-chip memory consumption and the corresponding
required memory traffic. They can also reduce the required storage
size on chip, thereby allowing for smaller buffers or, alternatively,
increased reuse. This is because, although the same amount of data
can be stored in a buffer, the encoded data corresponds to a greater
proportion of the full-sized input tensor.
Pruning can also lead to reduced energy consumption and la-
tency due to the elimination of unnecessary computations. Similar
to what we described above, this is relatively straightforward to
achieve through structured pruning, but unstructured pruning re-
quires special techniques for identifying and bypassing calculations
involving null elements [8, 9, 35, 164, 248, 251]. This can involve
identifying and skipping individual elements or entire null vectors.
Some detection and skipping methods only save energy by not
performing the operation involving the null element. That is, the
PE doesn’t have to be used for the null computation, in which case
it avoids energy consumption. Other methods additionally seek to
reduce latency by assigning a different effectual computation to the
skipped PE, rather than having them idle for the ineffectual com-
pute cycles. Furthermore, in order to maintain PE utilization with
unstructured sparse matmuls, it may also be necessary to perform
load balancing. Since the distribution of zeros can be unbalanced
between PEs, some PEs may require a longer execution time than
others, resulting in idle waiting periods of the others. Several works
have used load balancing for accelerating neural networks with
unstructured sparsity [81, 119, 147].

4.3
Transformer-specific Optimization
Methods

The use of off-the-shelf optimization methods such as quantiza-
tion and pruning can lead to significant performance advantages.
Nevertheless, there are other optimization strategies that are tai-
lored specifically for the Transformer architecture, e.g., by taking
advantage of the features within it. Here, we review the signifi-
cant Transformer-specific optimization techniques that can further
optimize Transformer inference.

4.3.1
Accelerating Attention. Several works aim to optimize
the attention mechanism in the MHA module. Recall that the time
spent performing the matrix multiplications in the MHA module
grows quadratically with sequence length for long sequences, as
outlined in Sec. 2.2.2. Therefore, for long sequences, computing
attention becomes the dominant portion of the overall runtime. One
common route for more efficiently computing the attention net-
work is token pruning. This involves removing unimportant tokens
so as to reduce the effective sequence lengths, as was discussed in
Section 4.2. The need to efficiently identify and drop unimportant
tokens on-the-fly has led to several hardware-software co-design ap-
proaches. In SpAtten [223], tokens are ranked based on the amount
of attention they are getting from other tokens in the input sen-
tence, and the tokens that are receiving less attention are pruned
out. This approach is based on the simple rationale that the more a
word is attended, the more important it is in the inference process.
To make this efficient, a top-𝑘hardware engine is employed to
filter out the low-importance tokens based on their attention scores.
DTA-Trans [237] takes a step further by introducing the two-tiered
scheme where in the first round, it determines which tokens should

be pruned, and in the second round, it further determines the bit-
precision to be allocated to each of the remaining tokens based on
their significance.
Another approach to accelerate attention is to leverage the dy-
namic sparsity patterns of the attention score activations [79, 80,
131, 147, 172, 194, 204, 253]. It is reasonable to assume that many
combinations of query and key tokens are not semantically mean-
ingful, and thus the attention score associated with this combination
will be close to zero. By taking advantage of this sparsity, the in-
ference accuracy can be preserved while the computational cost is
reduced by avoiding the associated act-to-act matmuls (i.e., query ×
key or attention score × value). However, this requires specialized
hardware logic to detect and accelerate those dynamic sparsity pat-
terns on-the-fly. For instance, ELSA [80] proposes a datapath that
approximates the angular similarity between key and query vectors,
thus allowing the prediction of whether their dot product is likely
to be zero. This approach enables the pruning of less important
key vectors with respect to a given query vector in advance. The
Sanger framework [147] suggests quantizing the query and key
values prior to computing the attention score, as this will zero out
insignificant entries in the resulting attention score that would have
been close to zero if those values were not quantized. Similarly,
DOTA [172] proposes to approximate the attention score entries to
be zeroed out by employing the matrix multiplication of low-rank
(and hence smaller) projections of the query and key values as a
proxy. LeOPArd [131] uses bit-serial computing for the query ×
key multiplications in order to terminate computation early if it
will not reach the pre-determined threshold.
It is worth noting that hardware support is essential for accel-
erating attention mechanisms, as it enables operations such as
top-𝑘[223, 237], angle approximation [80], clustering [204], and
multi-precision computation [13, 147, 172, 253] that are necessary
to detect the dynamic sparsity patterns of attention scores. Further-
more, specialized hardware support is needed to take advantage of
the (mostly unstructured) dynamic sparsity for skipping compu-
tations. For example, Sanger [147] uses load rebalancing through
splitting and packing, and it is equipped with a custom datapath
that provides support for both sampled dense-dense matmuls and
sparse matmuls.

thus reducing the number of passes required for the numerically sta-
ble Softmax computation from 3 to 2. I-BERT [111] provides a more
general approximation algorithm that approximates the nonlinear
operations with 2nd-order polynomials. This not only simplifies
the operations, but it also enables them to be performed using
only integer arithmetic. SpAtten [223] takes a similar approach
to use a 5th-order Taylor approximation for computing Softmax,
as described in [160]. I-ViT [132] further extends this idea to use
hardware-friendly bit shifting operation to efficiently compute the
nonlinear operations for vision Transformer inference. While the
major focus has been approximating the exponential operation for
the Softmax, other works [19, 209, 225] have also exploited the log
sum-exp trick to avoid the division operation, another operation
that can be complicated to implement in hardware [60].
Another widely-adopted approach is lookup tables, which store
pre-calculated output values for a given range of inputs. In this case,
if the input is given, the corresponding value stored in the lookup
table is outputted, eliminating the need for evaluating the function.
The use of lookup tables to accelerate the nonlinear function is
by no means a new concept, with its root predating the advent of
Transformer or DNN architectures [50, 212]. Recent approaches,
therefore, have more focused on reducing the size of the lookup
table to save area and latency. For instance, 𝐴3 [79] decomposes
the exponential operation into a multiplication of two smaller-
precision exponential operations, allowing one larger lookup table
to be replaced with two smaller ones. NN-LUT [244] approximates
the nonlinear operation using a single-hidden layer network and
stores a numerical approximation of the network in a lookup table,
thereby avoiding the need for executing the network.

4.3.3
Accelerating Decoding. As discussed in Sec. 2.2, Trans-
former decoding for generative inference can entail a significant
inference latency due to the low hardware utilization and arithmetic
intensity. Due to the growing interest in generative tasks due to the
recent advancements of Large Language Models [2, 22, 44, 213], it
is critical to optimize the latency for the decoding process. One av-
enue to reduce inference latency is to skip unnecessary computation
through early exiting. This method dynamically adjusts the depth
of the decoder for each token generation by terminating the infer-
ence at a mid-layer and making a prediction using the intermediate
hidden states, rather than waiting until the end layer. While being a
well-explored technique for encoder models [192, 234], CALM [191]
has only recently extended this methodology to decoder models. A
major challenge in decoding tasks is that, unlike in encoding tasks,
the generation of one token relies on the activations of all previ-
ous tokens, due to the attention mechanism. If a previous token is
exited early, then there is nothing to attend for the skipped layers.
To address this issue, CALM proposes “state propagation,” which
copies the activations of the final layer before exiting to all the
skipped layers. This had a minimal impact on generation quality.
Another recent attempt is to collaboratively use multiple models
with different sizes [31, 112]. The underlying motivation is that the
majority of simple word generation can be offloaded to a faster, less
accurate model with a smaller size. Once in a while, when the small
model is unable to predict a word accurately, it switches the control
to the larger model for more accurate prediction. This approach not
only enables the execution of the large model to be carried out less

4.3.2
Nonlinear Operations. As discussed in Sec. 2.1.1, the Trans-
former architecture contains multiple nonlinear functions that pose
multiple challenges in efficient hardware design. Incorporating a
hardware module specialized for computing these operations may
be a viable solution. However, this may incur a considerable over-
head for hardware design, particularly when targeting low-end
devices. Therefore, various solutions have been proposed to circum-
vent this issue, without constructing a dedicated hardware module.
One popular solution is function approximation [107, 111, 132,
203, 223], which seeks to approximate the exact value of the non-
linear function, in order to obtain a good yet computationally ef-
ficient approximation. For instance, Keller et al. [107] uses the
Softermax [203] function, which uses a base-2 approximation that
switches the base used in the exponential calculation of the Softmax
operation from 𝑒to 2, allowing for simplified hardware implementa-
tions. Softermax [203] also incorporates online normalization [157],

frequently, but it also enables its non-autoregressive (i.e., token-
level parallel) execution since it can consume all tokens generated
from the small model and process them in parallel, thereby utilizing
hardware more efficiently. Big Little Decoder [112] has shown ∼2×
inference latency reduction across various models and generative
tasks without compromising generation quality.

methods should also be aware of the underlying hardware
architectures and datapaths. The use of separate datapaths
for the MHA and FFN modules can have higher area over-
head, but can enable more aggressive optimization as com-
pared to using a single datapath for both modules.

4.3.4
Selecting Which Optimization Methods to Use. So far,
we have discussed various optimization techniques that can be ap-
plied to the Transformer architecture. It is important to note that a
significant portion of these optimization methods depends upon
the underlying hardware support. Thus, when selecting which opti-
mization techniques to employ, it is essential to adopt a holistic view
of both the hardware and software stack, taking into account the
characteristics of the underlying hardware. In particular, whether
the accelerator supports MHA and FFN modules in the same datap-
ath versus containing separate datapaths for each of these modules
can have a significant impact on the optimizations that can be
performed.
Accelerators with a unified datapath tend to pursue more general
optimizations that can either be applied to both MHA and FFN mod-
ules, or at least those that do not require altering the datapath such
that it can no longer compute the other modules. For example, sev-
eral accelerators that support both MHA and FFN modules employ
general static pruning methods for weight matrices [65, 166, 209],
but do not aim to exploit attention-specific pruning methods such
as dynamic sparsity. However, more exotic optimizations can be
pursued separately for the MHA and FFN modules, if they are com-
puted in separate datapaths or if the PEs can be reconfigured. For
instance, FABNet [64] exploits static sparsity patterns that can only
be applied to the FFN module by adopting separate datapaths for the
MHA and FFN modules. FTRANS [127] also applies different opti-
mization methods for the MHA and FFN modules by incorporating
reconfigurable PEs that can handle both workloads without having
two separate datapaths. However, employing separate datapaths or
reconfigurable PEs can incur an additional overhead, as compared
to using a general, unified datapath. Consequently, there is a trade-
off to consider between the area overhead and the performance
gain derived from the use of more aggressive optimizations.

5
MAPPING TRANSFORMERS TO
HARDWARE

In order to execute a Transformer block on a target hardware archi-
tecture, we must map it into hardware instructions that carry out
both the required computation and communication. The choices
made during the mapping process play a significant role in perfor-
mance. However, the size of the space of possible mappings makes
finding the optimal mappings difficult, and it requires the use of
carefully considered exploration, heuristic, or learning-based ap-
proaches.
In this section, we provide an introduction to the mapping prob-
lem in Sec. 5.1; and we discuss key mapping decisions for efficient
execution of Transformers in Sec. 5.2. We overview the taxonomy of
existing mapping techniques in Sec. 5.3 and similarly for techniques
to model the performance of different mappings in Sec. 5.4. Finally,
we end with Transformer-specific considerations for mappers in
Sec. 5.5.

5.1
What are Mappings?

A mapping or schedule is defined as a sequence of hardware instruc-
tions to execute a set of operations on the specific target hardware
architecture. In the case of a systolic array accelerator such as Gem-
mini, such hardware instructions might include dense matmuls
under a specific dataflow and load/stores to move data between
off-chip DRAM and local SRAMs. A mapping will list the complete
sequence of data and memory instructions, with the end goal of
producing source code or compiled binaries that can be executed
on hardware.
For some operations, there may exist multiple valid mappings,
where the validity refers to the guarantee of correctness from exe-
cuting each mapping. Specifically, different sets of mapping deci-
sions applied to the same problem may result in valid yet different
mappings. We refer to the total space of mapping decisions and
their resulting mappings as the mapspace. Details about individual
mapping decisions are discussed in the following Sec. 5.2.
It is not surprising that two different valid mappings may ex-
hibit differences in end-to-end performance, when measured with
respect to latency, bandwidth, and energy consumption. Hence, it
is often the goal of a mapping or scheduling framework to obtain
Pareto-optimal, valid mappings for a given software operation and
desired performance metrics. For some operations, finding a good
mapping is unnecessary, either because the problem is trivial, as
the mapspace is small, or because the operation itself is not a per-
formance bottleneck and does not warrant the effort of judicious
scheduling. However, in the case of core computational operators in
DNNs, including Transformers, the mapping problem is both chal-
lenging due to large mapspace and rewarding due to the potential
gains in overall model execution speedup.

Summary (Sec. 4.3. Transformer-specific Optimiza-
tions): While general off-the-shelf optimization methods
can also benefit efficient Transformer inference, a great
deal of research has been conducted to devise optimization
strategies that take advantage of Transformer-specific char-
acteristics. One opportunity is to optimize the attention
mechanism in the MHA module, whose runtime cost in-
creases quadratically with sequence length. For instance,
dynamic pruning has been widely applied to take advantage
of the sparse nature of attention score activations. Addi-
tionally, efficient computation of the nonlinear operations
should also be taken into account. In order to reduce the
hardware costs associated with the implementation of ded-
icated hardware units for nonlinear operations, function
approximation, and lookup table methods have been pro-
posed as viable alternatives. Finally, the model optimization

Conv in 6 nested loops:

Conv

for p in [0, P):
for q in [0, Q):
for c in [0, C):
for k in [0, K):
for r in [0, R):
for s in [0, S):
Outputs[p][q][k]+=
Inputs[(p-1)*stride+r][(q-1)*stride+s]*Weights[r][s][c][k]

Inputs
Weights
Outputs

C

K

(Q - 1) x Stride + S

K

∗

=

Q

...

S

Conv mapping:

P

(P - 1) x Stride + R

C

---------DRAM ---------------------
| for p1 in [0:4)
| for s0 in [0:3)
| for c1 in [0:16) (Spatial-X)

R

Loop Permutation

Spatial Mapping

---------LocalBuffer---------------
| for q0 in [0:28)
| for p0 in [0:7)
| for k0 in [0:128)
| for c0 in [0:8)

R, S: convolution kernel width and height
P, Q: output width and height
C: input channel size
K: output channel size

Temporal Mapping

Tiling Factors

Figure 16: Visualization of mapping for the convolution operation in CNNs onto a typical DNN accelerator. Convolution is represented as a
six-nested loop excluding the batch dimension. Loop permutation concerns the order in which each loop level should be executed, with memory
accesses to and from either the accelerator’s local memory or off-chip DRAM. Spatio-temporal mapping determines which loop level should be
executed in parallel using accelerator hardware resources. Tiling factors are the loop bounds of each loop level, where each dimension can be
broken down with tiles into several sub-loops. As shown in the example, the input channel size dimension (𝐶) is tiled with a tiling factor of 8,
hence into two sub-loops with loop variables 𝑐0 and 𝑐1.

Matmul in 3 nested loops:

Matmul

for m in [0, M):
for n in [0, N):
for k in [0, K):
Outputs[m][n]+=Inputs[m][k]*Weights[k][n]

Inputs
Weights
Outputs

∗

=

M

M

K

Matmul mapping:

---------DRAM ---------------------
| for n1 in [0:4)
| for m1 in [0:4)
| for n0 in [0:4) (Spatial-X)

N

N

K

Loop Permutation

Spatial Mapping

M: number of rows in the output matrix
K: reduction dimension size
N: number of columns in the output matrix

Temporal Mapping

---------LocalBuffer---------------
| for m0 in [0:16)
| for k0 in [0:64)

Tiling Factors

Figure 17: Visualization of mapping for the matmul operation in Transformer encoder/decoders onto a typical DNN accelerator. Matrix
multiplication is represented as a three-nested loop. Loop permutation concerns the order in which each loop level should be executed, with
memory accesses to and from either the accelerator’s local memory or off-chip DRAM. Spatio-temporal mapping determines which loop level
should be executed in parallel using accelerator hardware resources. Tiling factors are the loop bounds of each loop level, where each dimension
can be broken down with tiles into several sub-loops. As shown in the example, the output column dimension (𝑁) is tiled with a tiling factor of 4,
hence into two sub-loops with loop variables 𝑛0 and 𝑛1. As we will discuss in Sec. 5.5.1, even though matmuls have 3 nested loops instead of 6 as
in the convolutions, finding an optimal mapping could still be as challenging.

Fig. 16 and 17 illustrate examples of key operators and their
possible mappings, for CNNs and Transformers, respectively. As
shown in the example mappings, each level of the nested loops must
be: (1) assigned to be executed either with data from DRAM or from
local accelerator memory; (2) assigned to be executed spatially
(i.e., in parallel) or temporally (i.e., sequentially), if the accelerator
contains spatially parallelized compute resources; and (3) assigned
to be executed as one loop or tiled into multiple subloops (and if so,
with which tiling factors). In particular, for the case of Gemmini,
spatial mapping concerns the decision to assign which loop levels
to be executed on the N-by-N systolic array mesh of PEs.

retain accuracy even with extreme sparsity levels, but it is hard
to accelerate. Nevertheless, the latter is going to become in-
creasingly more important since it reduces the memory traffic,
which is becoming a major bottleneck for power consumption.

5.2.2
Operation-level. The operation-level scheduling step de-
composes tensor operations into a set of tasks to be run on a given
architecture. This consists of several different steps, each of which
presents a programmer with a decision problem. These include:

• Dividing the operation into tiles that can fit onto different layers
of the memory hierarchy; the dimensions of the tiles are a choice
(e.g., tile sizes in Fig. 17).
• Determining the dataflow of the computation, i.e., the order that
the tiles are executed in and the tensors that are held stationary
or moved across the processor. This can be encoded as a loop
ordering problem, with the innermost loops corresponding to
axes of tensors being held stationary (e.g., any loop permutation
in Fig. 16).
• Deciding which axes to parallelize, and which to run serially,
which we refer to as spatio-temporal mapping.
• Deciding how to interleave communication and computation in
order to minimize latency. For instance, double-buffering may
divide the scratchpad into two halves, with one half being used
by the processor for computation while the other is loaded with
data from memory.
• Mapping arithmetic instructions onto hardware instructions.
For some architectures, this may be as simple as replacing a
matmul operation of the appropriate size (achieved by a tiling)
with a call to the appropriate ISA (Instruction Set Architecture)
instruction. For others, it may involve selecting between differ-
ent vector instructions, which may affect the decision of which
axes to vectorize, and the resulting spatio-temporal mapping.

5.2
What Are the Key Mapping Decisions?

Mapping occurs in two steps. First, the graph is transformed at a
graph level into a set of tensor operations. This may involve fusing
successive operations, sparsifying tensors, and deciding on appro-
priate quantization strategies. Then, each resulting tensor operation
is scheduled in order to transform it into hardware instructions of
the appropriate size.

5.2.1
Graph-level. Graph-level scheduling involves decisions that
change the structure of the computational graph, rather than sim-
ply the execution schedule of tensor operations represented by
individual nodes within the graph. Typical changes include the
following:

• Layer fusion or operation fusion refers to combining multiple
layers (e.g., a matmul followed by a normalization layer) into a
single tensor operation to be scheduled and run on the accel-
erator. This reduces interlayer communication, as the results
of one layer can remain on the chip as input without being
written to and later read from main memory, at the cost of
intralayer communication. As we will see in Sec. 5.5, layer fu-
sion may not provide as much latency improvement, as with
CNN architectures, since static fusion opportunities are not as
straightforward as fusing convolutions with BatchNorm layers.
For Transformers, it is possible to combine several operations
in the same kernel, but this may increase intralayer commu-
nication to an extent that renders such approaches infeasible.
Furthermore, this can also be dependent on the target hard-
ware platform.
• Dynamic sparsification of tensors happens when the pruning
decisions are made based on the activation maps. Common
methods for dynamic sparsification includes locality-sensitive
hashing to zero out dot products likely to be small. This can sig-
nificantly reduce the number of arithmetic operations required
in the operation, as was also discussed in 4.2. Such optimiza-
tions are heavily data-dependent as they require access to the
activations and, as a result, cannot always be estimated a pri-
ori [103]. As a result, relatively few results on sparsity-aware
mapping exist, and those that do largely cover operation-level
mappings for a given amount of sparsity.
• Static sparsification of tensors happens when the pruning de-
cisions are independent of the activations and are determined
statically. As was discussed in Sec 4.2, there are various meth-
ods used for static sparsification. In general, structured sparsity
results in high speedup, but it also often results in non-trivial
accuracy degradation, whereas unstructured sparsity is able to

A more complete description can be found in [128].
The choice of points in the mapspace heavily affects performance,
by up to several orders of magnitude, as we will discuss in Sec. 5.5.1.
For this reason, the goal of a hardware mapper is to select a point
in this space to minimize some cost such as energy, energy-delay
product (EDP), latency, etc., on a given hardware target. However,
the size of the mapspace renders exploration difficult. For exam-
ple, considering only tiling, spatio-temporal mapping, and loop
ordering (dataflow), the number of possible mappings for a BERT
attention layer can exceed 1012. As a result, the design and selection
of mappers have been the subject of significant attention in both
theory and practice.
Furthermore, the optimal mapping can significantly differ de-
pending on hardware architecture, and mappings that work well
for one set of hardware parameters often perform poorly on others
[103]. This significantly increases the difficulty of mapping within a
codesign context, as one must be computed for every pair of neural
network and hardware architecture.

Summary (Sec. 5.2. Key Mapping Decisions): Mapping
Transformers to hardware require decisions to be made
both at the graph and operator levels. These decisions range
from choosing simple numerical or categorical parameters
to structural modifications to the program being run. The

model or to directly search for the solution using blackbox-tuning.
Although such approaches can potentially learn the scheduling
space accurately, their computational cost is significant due to both
the cost of evaluating enough schedules to learn a model as well as
the cost of learning based algorithms. As a result, these approaches
typically apply to existing hardware or analytical models where
large-scale measurement is feasible.
Constrained-optimization approaches contrast with exhaustive
search and learning-based algorithms, in that they formulate sched-
uling problems as a numerical optimization problem to determine
variable assignments subject to a given set of constraints and ob-
jective functions. Popular techniques, such as Mixed Integer Pro-
gramming (MIP), have demonstrated their applicability to solve
large-scale and complex problems. In particular, polyhedral transfor-
mation has leveraged constrained-optimization based approaches
for auto-vectorization and loop tiling [5, 6, 15, 21, 75, 116, 165].
These polyhedral optimizations focus on testing the feasibility of
a transform and offering information to guide iterative searches.
On the other hand, [92, 129] leverage the regularities in the ML
workloads and hardware to formulate the mapping as optimization
problems, which can then be directly solved by off-the-shelf solvers.

space of decisions required is enormous, growing combina-
torially with each possible decision, but selecting a good
point in the space can significantly affect performance.

5.3
Finding Performant Mappings

In order to deal with the size of the search space, many accelerator-
aware mapping techniques [84, 92, 102, 129, 163, 239] and fully-
fledged compilers frameworks [3, 32, 33, 114, 161, 167, 185] have
been developed. These are briefly discussed below.

5.3.1
Mapping Strategies. To deal with the size of the search
space, mapping algorithms focus on a subspace of the mapspace,
only making decisions about how to perform a subset of steps
required to map the network onto the architecture.

Graph-level Schedulers. Most of existing ML compilation frame-
works (e.g., XLA [185], TensorRT [161], TVM [33], Glow [184] and
CuDNN [41]) target graph-level optimizations such as operation
fusion, resource allocation, graph partitioning, graph rewriting, etc.
A large number of operation fusion techniques [10, 247, 252] have
been developed to optimize the mapping for more data reuse across
DNN layers. Among these, a few Transformer-specific operation
fusion techniques have been proposed [42, 168]. In particular, [42]
decomposes the Softmax layer and dynamically fuses the GPU ker-
nels for decomposed layers with the proceeding and succeeding
matmul layers in the MHA block. Relatedly, [168] shows that fusing
LayerNorm layers and composing big matmul from small matmuls
are beneficial to transform performance on GPUs. In [104], an op-
timized dataflow for DNN accelerators is introduced to efficiently
fuse the key matmul and Softmax layers in MHA. To learn about
the operation fusion tradeoffs in the Gemmini accelerator, we have
performed a case study and included the analysis in Sec. 5.5.

Summary (Sec. 5.3. Finding Performant Mappings): A
comprehensive set of strategies has been developed to ad-
dress the challenge of mapping DNNs on accelerators and
general-purpose processors. The techniques originally de-
veloped to target CNNs can be applied to Transformers as
the key operations are also tensor algebra operations. At
the graph level, operator fusion is an important optimiza-
tion technique that encodes a vast mapping space to decide
how the execution of layers are overlapped. At the opera-
tion level, mapping strategies can be broadly categorized as
either search strategies - either random or feedback-driven
- or optimization or heuristic strategies.

Operation-level Mappers. In Sec. 5.2.2, we discussed that the
decisions around tiling, dataflow, and spatio-temporal mapping can
result in an enormous search space, and that selecting a good point
in the space is key to achieving high efficiency and utilization in ML
accelerators. Within the scope of a given subspace, mappers can gen-
erally be divided into three general categories, based on how they
make their decisions: brute-force search; feedback-based search;
and constrained optimization. Tab. 6 summarizes existing mappers
that leverage different techniques to navigate the mapspace.
Brute-force methods [29, 48, 163, 239] entail various sampling
strategies that either exhaustively explore or randomly sample a
large number of points from the mapspace. To lower the exhaustive
search cost, mappers in this category typically rely on developer
heuristics to prune the mapspace and lightweight performance
models to compare all valid mappings to find the best mapping in a
reasonable amount of time. The disadvantages of this approach are
two-fold: not only does a brute-force search tend to be exceedingly
expensive, especially for more complex target workloads and hard-
ware architectures; but also this costly process repeats for any target
workload or accelerator architecture changes, without leveraging
any prior knowledge.
Feedback-driven approaches use ML algorithms or other statisti-
cal methods [7, 33, 99, 179] either to improve the accuracy of the cost

5.4
Performance Modeling of Mappings

Performance models can provide the mappers with performance
feedback for different mappings without executing mappings on
real hardware or running simulations on accelerators under de-
velopment. They can significantly reduce the evaluation costs for
mappers and be used as performance proxies to optimize mappings.
Different performance models offer different levels of fidelity, run-
time costs, target workload scopes, and compatibility for various
mapping algorithms. The selection of the performance model is
both mapper and target workload dependent.
For Transformers, the mappers can use domain-specific poly-
nomial [92] and analytical models [122, 146, 153, 163] to provide
fast comparisons among mappings. These models leverage known
iteration space bounds in tensor algebra workloads, as well as stati-
cally analyzable data access patterns, to estimate performance. The
polynomial models expressed in mathematical forms can also be
used directly as the objectives in optimization-based mappers.
Another class of popular performance models involves data-
driven ML models [33, 84, 106]. Instead of building the performance
model analytically to express known relations between mapping

Search Strategy
Mappers

Brute-force & Random Approaches:
Timeloop [163], dMazeRunner [48], Flexflow [99], Triton [214], Interstellar [239], Marvel [29]

Feedback-based Approaches:
AutoTVM [33] (XGBoost), Ansor [249] (beam search), Halide [179] (beam search [7], OpenTuner [11,
158]), FlexFlow [99] (MCMC), ConfuciuX [101] (RL), Gamma [102] (genetic algorithm), Mind
Mapping [84] (gradient-based search)

Constrained Optimization Approaches:
Polly+Pluto [20, 21, 75], Tensor Comprehension [216], Tiramisu [14], IOOpt [162], Analytical
characterization [129], CoSA [92]

Table 6: State-of-the-art DNN schedulers for heterogeneous accelerators.

executable code by representing these points as a series of rewrite
rules [158, 249].

decisions and performance, these models use statistical techniques
to iteratively fit a model to the mapping performance data collected
over time. They typically require large amounts of data in order to
learn and provide accurate predictions. Once trained, they can be
easily integrated with ML-based mappers [84, 199].
The major drawback of prior models is that the generated map-
pings might not perform optimally (or even well) on the actual
accelerator since the models can fail to capture the implementa-
tion differences in the hardware accurately. Cycle-exact software
models based on real hardware implementation can achieve higher
fidelity [187, 218], as can FPGA emulation using platforms such as
Firesim [105], which can be used to model hardware in develop-
ment. However, such platforms require more than a set of problem
dimensions and a description of mappings; they require a stream
of explicit instructions.
Generating this stream of instructions requires that one account
for a large number of edge cases. For example, a simple tiling op-
eration for a matmul −representable as a single line of tile sizes
in Timeloop [163] −requires both the insertion of instructions
specifying memory movement between different levels of the mem-
ory hierarchy as well as the generation code for edge cases that
appear when matrix dimensions are not evenly divisible by the tile
size. Furthermore, the codesign process requires this process to be
automatable. In other words, each mapping must be translatable to
code automatically.
As a result, code generation [33, 126, 180] tools are used to actually
implement mappings onto hardware (or simulators). Many of these
tools integrate not only a specification of the hardware backend but
also mapping decision algorithms, often tuned for that hardware
target. Such tools can also be useful for neural architecture search
(NAS) in order to obtain accurate performance numbers for a given
hardware architecture to guide automated DNN architecture design
(see Sec. 6.1 for details). However, these tools are difficult to adapt for
a codesign framework where both the mapspace and the hardware
target can vary.
In order to address this problem, user-schedulable languages such
as Halide [179], TVM [33], Rise/Elevate [78], and Exo [95] have
been developed. These tools take as input a description of the com-
putation to be performed and a point in the mapspace. They are
generally defined by a set of rewrite rules, representing certain
transformations such as splitting and rearranging loops, replacing
appropriate loops with ISA instructions, and fusing loops. These
languages also allow the user to specify and customize the hard-
ware instruction set and seamlessly convert found schedules into

Summary (Sec. 5.4. Performance Modeling of Map-
pings): Performance estimation of Transformers running
on novel architecture is essential for finding an optimal
algorithm, mapping, and hardware combination. There are
various open-source performance models available to esti-
mate the mapping performance on hardware, ranging from
domain-specific analytical models and data-driven ML mod-
els to cycle-exact models. The selection of the performance
model for Transformer depends on the target workload
size, hardware complexity, and development stage. Addi-
tionally, there are many mature code generation tools one
can leverage to optimize the Transformer design for off-the-
shelf hardware.

5.5
Transformer vs CNN Mapping

Prior work discussed in Sec. 5.3 for finding good mapping strategies
largely focuses on mapping CNNs onto accelerators or general-
purpose hardware. As with CNNs, the vast majority of cycles for
Transformers are spent on matmuls from the MHA and FFN mod-
ules. In essence, existing mappers for CNNs can easily extend to
scheduling Transformer matmuls. However, as we have discussed
in Sec 3.4.2, Transformer blocks include LayerNorm and Softmax
operations, which can be computationally non-trivial in certain
realistic scenarios (which was also observed by [42, 168]). In turn,
the presence of these operations imposes constraints on scheduling
the preceding and succeeding matmuls. This leads to a much more
complex problem for scheduling optimizations for Transformers
overall. In this subsection:

• We characterize the mapspace of Transformer blocks in com-
parison to that of CNNs (Sec. 5.5.1).
• We take a deeper dive into the issue of increased scheduling
complexity of Transformer matrix operations due to the pres-
ence of LayerNorm and Softmax (Sec. 5.5.2).

5.5.1
Mapspace Characterization of Transformers. We em-
pirically characterize the search space of legal mappings for repre-
sentative Transformer and CNN architectures. To do so, we chose
BERT [52] and ResNet50 [82], respectively. A total of 100K random
valid mappings were searched via the Timeloop mapper [163], and
the estimated latency and energy were measured by the Timeloop

2000

4000

BERT-Large MHA
BERT-Base MHA
BERT-Base FFN
BERT-Large FFN

ResNet50 7x7 64
ResNet50 1x1 512
ResNet50 3x3 512
ResNet50 1x1 2048

1750

3500

1500

3000

1250

2500

Count

Count

1000

2000

750

1500

500

1000

250

500

0

0

100
101
102
103
104
EDP Relative to Minimum

100
101
102
103
104
EDP Relative to Minimum

Figure 18: A comparison of the mapspace of (Left) BERT and (Right) ResNet50. Distributions of 100K randomly sampled valid mappings are
shown. Both distributions show a similar range of EDP of up to four degrees of magnitude difference with respect to the best (minimum) observed
value. Neither distribution is significantly more skewed towards lower or higher relative EDP. Overall, we find that mapspaces for BERT matmuls
and ResNet50 convolutions are similarly vast in size with no significant difference in the shapes of their distribution. This indicates that brute-force
or random search for BERT matmul scheduling is equally as challenging as in the case with ResNet50 operators.

which takes part in expanding the hidden dimension to four times
its value.
From ResNet50, we choose convolution operations of varying
kernel sizes and shapes, spanning 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 7 × 7 convolution
kernels. Specifically, we use the 7×7 kernel convolution with output
channel size 64 and stride 2 in the conv1 layer of ResNet50, the 3×3
kernel convolution with 512 channels and 1×1 kernel convolutions
with output channel sizes 512 and 2048 that belong to the final
convolution layer conv5_x. These four particular convolutions vary
in channel and kernel sizes and reasonably represent convolutions
found in ResNet50.
From our mapspace analysis, we observe that both BERT and
ResNet50 mapspace have a similar range of potential energy-delay
product values from randomly sampled mappings. Accounting for
variations between operators for each architecture, the distribution
of EDP values for themselves are also largely similar, in that the
portion of Pareto-optimal mappings with lower EDP values are
small for both BERT and ResNet50 operators.
As an alternative visualization, Fig. 19 compares the empirical
cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the same set of 100K
random mappings. Here, we closely examine the difference in the
CDFs near the regime where near-optimal mappings are found.
We observe that the relative EDP value corresponding to the tenth
percentile is 7.44 for the 3 × 3, 512 convolution and 12.06 for the
1 × 1, 2048 convolution kernels. BERT matmuls for MHA and FFN
projection had tenth percentile values of 9.42 and 9.84, respectively.
Alternatively, we also examine the percentage of mappings with
relative EDP values less than 3 times the observed minimum. This
percentage represents a rough upper bound on the number of map-
pings that can be safely labeled as near-optimal, and the difference
in percentages signify relative difficulties in searching for optimal
mapping for different operators. We find 1.58% for the 3 × 3, 512
kernel and 2.62% for the 1 × 1, 2048 kernel with mappings within
this range of EDP. In the case of BERT, the MHA projection matmul
is shown to have 1.70% of mappings with relative EDP less than 3
with 1.48% of mappings in this range for the FFN matmul.

0.200

BERT-Base MHA
BERT-Large FFN
ResNet50 7x7 64
ResNet50 1x1 512
ResNet50 3x3 512
ResNet50 1x1 2048

0.175

0.150

0.125

CDF

0.100

0.075

0.050

0.025

0.000

2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Relative EDP

Figure 19: Comparison of empirical cumulative distribution func-
tions (CDFs) for Transformer matmuls and ResNet50 convolutional
operations around the regime where near-optimal mappings are found.
The 10th percentile values for each relative EDP distribution are: 7.44
for the 3 × 3, 512 convolution kernel; 12.06 for the 1 × 1, 2048 kernel;
9.42 for the BERT MHA matmul; and 9.84 for the BERT FFN matmul.
Results show that the percentage of near-optimal mappings for BERT
matmuls are similar if not smaller than that of ResNet convolution
kernels. This indicates that the search problem of finding optimal
mappings can be as challenging for BERT matmuls.

model. The target spatial hardware architecture is the Gemmini
systolic generator [70]. Both the BERT and ResNet50 models are
assumed to have been 8-bit integer quantized. We assume an input
sequence length of 512, which is a typical assumption for BERT-
Base and BERT-Large models.

EDP Distribution Analysis. Fig. 18 demonstrates the compar-
ison between the mapspaces for BERT (Left) and ResNet50 (Right).
For the BERT MHA module, results in the figure correspond to map-
pings for the matmul performing each of the query, key, and value
projections. For the FFN, we take the matmul in the 𝑊1 projection,

5.5.2
Scheduling Complexities of LayerNorm and Softmax.
While we find that matmuls in Transformers are already non-trivial
targets for which to obtain efficient execution schedules to execute
on DNN accelerators, the problem is further complicated by the
presence of several non-linear operations, including LayerNorm and
Softmax that are interposed between different matrix operations.
When pursuing more aggressive optimizations, an enticing strategy
is to fuse relatively high-arithmetic-intensity matmuls with the
low-arithmetic-intensity normalization operations following them,
such as LayerNorm and Softmax. This can be especially enticing
in handling quantized workloads, where partial sums awaiting
normalization are often of much higher bitwidth than the final
normalized outputs. Architects familiar with CNN-type accelerators
may find this especially intuitive, since convolutions are often fused
with ReLU or max-pool operations.
Similarly, for Transformer Encoders, we could overlap the ex-
ecution of normalization operation and the previous matmul, yet
this is possible only with additional hardware support and appro-
priate constraints on the matmul execution schedule. To enable
complete latency-hiding of nonlinear operations, the tiling factor
size of either output dimension of the matmul must be maximized,
so that rows/columns are immediately ready and stored at the
Gemmini accumulator scratchpad for computing the mean and
standard deviation. We refer to this alternate scheduling approach
as fusion-optimized scheduling.
On the other hand, in memory-constrained edge devices, the
strategy is (somewhat unintuitively) counter-productive. The nor-
malization operations found in Transformers often require long
vectors of data to be resident in on-chip local memory before any
normalized output element can be produced. Furthermore, when
fusing matmuls with these normalization operations, awkward mat-
mul tile shapes are typically required. These awkward tile shapes
are often much larger in either dimension, as opposed to being
square-shaped, and such skewed tile shapes tend to yield far worse
arithmetic intensity. This greatly reduces the performance of the
matmuls, and it may increase the total memory traffic, even account-
ing for the high bitwidths of the unnormalized partial sums which
must be sent to and from outer memory when fusion is not enabled.
In Fig. 21, we take a deeper look at the performance implications
of fusion-optimized scheduling for BERT matmuls. We consider the
BERT-Base encoder with hidden dimension 768 and 12 attention
heads. By default we assume a sequence length of 512. As the target
hardware, we take the 16×16 weight-stationary systolic array Gem-
mini with custom hardware units for I-BERT implementations of
nonlinear operations (activation, normalization, etc.), as described
in Sec. 3.4.4. The total latency of each adjacent pair of matmul and
LayerNorm/Softmax operations is estimated via Timeloop[163].
Opportunities for overlapping computations include: (1) the MHA
query × key matmul and following Softmax; (2) MHA 𝑊out pro-
jection and following LayerNorm; and (3) FFN 𝑊2 projection and
following LayerNorm.
We compare two scheduling strategies. In the first strategy, we
use Gemmini’s default heuristic-based scheduler, which greedily
maximizes loop tile factors at the local SRAM level for each of
the three matmul dimensions. In this approach, we do not attempt
to overlap the matmul computation with the following nonlinear
operation, meaning that the matmul is scheduled independently as

2000

ResNet50 7x7 64
BERT d=240 MHA
BERT d=120 FFN

1750

1500

1250

Count

1000

750

500

250

0

100
101
102
103
104
EDP Relative to Minimum

Figure 20: Distributions of random, valid mappings for ResNet50
operators, compared against distributions for Transformer MHA and
FFN matrix multiplications, where the size of matmuls are tuned so
that total MACs are equivalent. The MHA matmul dimensions were
calibrated to 240 × 240 × 512 and similarly for the FFN 𝑊1 projection
matmul, set to 480 × 120 × 512 for 𝑑FFN = 4 × 𝑑. Comparing against
Fig. 18, we see that the EDP distributions are still similar for the
ResNet convolution and BERT matmuls. This implies that, even after
accounting for differences in the total number of MACs, the mapspace
of BERT matmuls exhibit as vast a range of relative EDPs as the
mapspace of CNN convolution kernels.

Overall, the analysis of EDP distribution from randomly sampled
valid mappings indicates that BERT matmuls, despite having fewer
loop levels for tiling and re-ordering compared to convolutions,
are as challenging to schedule as CNNs. As much as graph and
operator-level scheduling had a significant impact on end-to-end
performance and efficiency of CNN inference, the same impor-
tance of appropriate scheduling also applies to Transformer matrix
operations.

EDP Distribution Analysis with Fixed Total Number of MACs.
As an additional analysis on mapspace characterization, we further
force the total number of MACs to be fixed. This enables an even
fairer comparison between the distributions of mapping results for
Transformer and ResNet50 operators. We continue to assume the
Transformer input sequence length to be 512 and the feed-forward
network expansion ratio of 4 times the hidden dimension size. To
keep the number of MACs equal, we calculate the hidden dimen-
sion size that would yield the same total MACs as for the ResNet50
conv1 layer’s 7×7 kernel with output channel dimension 64. For
the matmul in the query projection of MHA, the corresponding
hidden dimension size was 240. Similarly, for the matmul in 𝑊1
projection of the FFN block, the corresponding hidden dimension
size was 120. To elucidate the comparison between synthetic BERT
layers and actual ResNet50 convolutions, we plot the corresponding
pairs mapping distributions in Fig. 20. Even after forcing equivalent
numbers of MACs, we see that the range of relative EDP values are
similar between BERT matmuls and ResNet50 convolutions. This
finding further accentuates how complex the scheduling problem
can be for matmuls found in Transformer models.

BERT-Base MHA Latency Breakdown
(Sequence Length = 512, Varying Accumulator Size)

BERT-Base MHA Latency Breakdown
(Sequence Length = 4096, Accumulator Size = 256kB)

250

5

Latency (Cycles, 1e6)

Latency (Cycles, 1e6)

200

4

150

3

100

2

50

1

0

Non-Fused
Fusion-Optimized
0

Non-Fused

Fusion-Optimized

Non-Fused

Fusion-Optimized

(128kB)

(128kB)

(256kB)

(256kB)

MHA (Q x K)
MHA (Softmax)
MHA (Wout proj.)
MHA (LN)
Figure 21: Impact of fusion-optimized scheduling for BERT MHA that enables latency hiding of LayerNorm and Softmax. Results are based on
the BERT-Base architecture and the Gemmini accelerator. (Left) Input sequence length is assumed to be 512, and the accumulator SRAM size is
increased from 128kB to 256kB. Hiding the Softmax latency improves combined matmul and Softmax latency by 78%. However, overlapping 𝑊out
projection with LayerNorm can either hurt or improve total latency, depending on the accumulator size. Overall, fusion-optimized scheduling for
both matmuls in MHA yields 23% and 52% latency improvements for accumulator sizes 128kB and 256kB, respectively. (Right) The input sequence
length is increased to 4096. Again, we see that overlapping the query × key matmul with Softmax improves latency by 22%. Overall, fusion of
both MHA matmuls with nonlinear operation yields a 21% latency improvement.

MHA (Q x K)
MHA (Softmax)
MHA (Wout proj.)
MHA (LN)

BERT-Base FFN Latency Breakdown
(Varying Sequence Length, Accumulator Size = 256kB)

regardless of accumulator size. In particular, we see that Softmax
latency is significant compared to the matmul, taking up around
78% of the total cycles, and hiding this latency significantly re-
duces total latency. At the same time, the query × key matmul
latency is relatively unchanged by the additional scheduling con-
straints, mainly because inner dimension of the matmul is small
(𝑑/𝑙= 64 for BERT-Base). On the other hand, the mapping con-
straints from fusion-optimized scheduling significantly harm the
execution latency of the 𝑊out projection matmul after fusing with
the following LayerNorm, resulting in 83% worse latency than the
non-fused schedule. However, once the accumulator size is doubled,
the performance hit on matmul scheduling is alleviated. Increased
accumulator SRAM size of 256kB allows more partial sums to be
stored in the buffer instead of spilling to DRAM, thereby reducing
total latency by 4%.
In the right plot of Fig. 21, we further investigate the impact of
sequence length on fusion-optimized scheduling for the MHA block.
Here, the sequence length is increased from 512 to 4096, which
impacts the ratio of cycles from matmuls, Softmax, and LayerNorm
in the MHA block. In particular, note that the size of the query × key
matmul and the Softmax computation depends quadratically on the
sequence length, while the other matmul and LayerNorm exhibit
a linear dependence. When fusing the query × key matmul with
the subsequent Softmax, the mapping constraints worsen matmul
performance despite a larger (256kB) accumulator size. This is
because with increased dimensions of the query × key matmul and
forced tiling factors, the scheduler can no longer avoid tiling at
the DRAM level. However, by overlapping the Softmax operation
and thereby eliminating the need to load and store intermediate
activations (which quadratically scales with the sequence length),
the latency increase from the query × key matrix can be offset,
resulting in an overall 22% reduction in latency.
On the other hand, Fig. 22 shows the results on matmul and Lay-
erNorm overlapping in the FFN 𝑊2 projection. Even with a larger
accumulator size and in both sequence lengths, we consistently

50

Latency (Cycles, 1e6)

40

30

20

10

0

Non-Fused
(seqlen 512)

Fusion-Optimized

Non-Fused
(seqlen 4096)

Fusion-Optimized

(seqlen 512)

(seqlen 4096)

FFN (W2 proj.)
FFN (LayerNorm)

Figure 22: Impact of fusion-optimized scheduling for BERT FFN
matmul that enables latency hiding of the LayerNorm operation.
Input sequence length is varied from 512 to 4096. We observe that
fusion-optimized scheduling hurts total latency by 27% in both cases.
This motivates the need to carefully evaluate the impact of chaining
matmul and LayerNorm execution on systolic arrays since the impact
of mapping constraints may outweigh the gains from latency hiding
of nonlinear operations.

if it were executed on its own. In Fig. 21, we denote this approach
as non-fused scheduling. The second strategy is the aforementioned
fusion-optimized scheduling.
The left plot of Fig. 21 summarizes how matmul and nonlin-
ear operation fusion within the MHA block can be influenced by
the accumulator SRAM size. In this experiment, while the on-chip
scratchpad for input activation and weights is held fixed at 256kB,
the output activation accumulator size is increased from 128kB to
256kB. We note two findings: first, within MHA, fusing query ×
key matmuls with Softmax for each attention head reduces latency

observe that fusion-optimized scheduling worsens total latency
by 27%. Together with previous findings, we see that latency im-
provements of fusion-optimized scheduling are dependent on the
accumulator SRAM size and sequence length. Furthermore, we find
that, in the BERT-Base scale, it is consistently favorable to overlap
the MHA query × key with the ensuing Softmax but consistently
disadvantageous to chain the FFN 𝑊2 projection matmul with Lay-
erNorm. This is in contrast with previous studies on GPU kernel
fusion for Transformers [42, 168], and it highlights how scheduling
for Transformer matmuls becomes more complex when targeting
different styles of custom hardware designs, including the Gemmini
accelerator.

will provide a general overview of NAS, and then Sec. 6.2 will ex-
plore hardware-aware NAS methods. These two subsections will be
mainly focused on NAS techniques for CNNs, as NAS was initially
introduced and extensively researched from the pre-Transformer
era. However, we believe it is helpful to provide a comprehensive
overview and background to understand NAS. In Sec. 6.3, NAS
methods specific to Transformer architectures will be discussed.
Finally, in Sec. 6.4, a case study of applying NAS method in the
scenario of optimizing Transformer inference on a target hardware
architecture will be provided.

6.1
Neural Architecture Search

Summary (Sec. 5.5. Transformer vs. CNN Mapping):
Here are the high-level takeaways from this section.

Typically, DNN architectures are designed and trained to achieve
the maximum accuracy for a given task, without necessarily consid-
ering the target hardware or inference latency, memory, and power
requirements. However, often there exist several different varia-
tions of the DNN architecture which result in the same accuracy
but have better hardware performance.
There is a rich literature in this area. Notable works here in-
clude MobileBERT [205], which is one of the earliest attempts, and
which adopts the bottleneck structure to design a thinner version
of Transformer, as well as Lite Transformer [232], which proposes
the Long-Short Range Attention, in which a group of heads are re-
placed with convolution operations to capture short-range contexts
more efficiently. SqueezeBERT [94] is another work that incorpo-
rates grouped convolutions into the Transformer architecture to
reduce the model size and latency. This approach is not limited to
NLP, and similar models have been proposed in computer vision
(CV) [24, 36, 130, 152] and speech recognition [23, 76, 109], to name
just a few.
It is often very difficult to find these DNN architectures since
the search space is exponentially large, even without considering
the underlying hardware platform. Even for those with expertise in
DNN architecture design, the impact of an architectural change on
accuracy and runtime performance can be nontrivial to predict. As
such, automated NAS methods have been proposed to adapt a DNN
architecture for a given constraint. However, it is critical to note that
NAS methods often require prohibitive amounts of compute and
trials before finding a candidate architecture. For instance, in one of
the early NAS works [255], finding an optimized CNN took 22,400
GPU-hours. Moreover, NAS methods are not yet fully automated,
and they often require hand-tuning the search space.
Broadly speaking, a NAS framework consists of three main com-
ponents: search space; search method; and evaluation method [18,
61]. The search space consists of a set of valid operations (e.g., con-
volution, pooling, activation, etc.) and their connectivity that define
valid DNN architectures, from which a candidate model can be
drawn. Prior knowledge and human intuition regarding good DNN
designs is often necessary in order to restrict the search space and
improve the search efficiency. The search method defines how to
explore the search space. Exhaustive search is obviously intractable.
Therefore, it is critical to have methods for quickly exploring the
search space and sampling candidate architectures. The evalua-
tion method is a way of assessing how well candidate architectures
perform on unseen data. The most naive method is to evaluate all
candidate architectures after the full training process is complete.

• Scheduling for Transformer matmuls is as challeng-
ing as scheduling CNN convolution operators. Both
mapspaces have similar distributions of relative EDPs
and similar percentages of near-optimal mappings.
Brute-force or random scheduling is not simpler for
Transformer matmuls, despite them having fewer loop
levels than convolutions.
• The presence of nonlinear operations such as Layer-
Norm and Softmax present additional complexities to
the scheduling problem for Transformer matmuls. La-
tency of these nonlinear operations can be hidden by
fusing its computation with the preceding matmul.
This requires additional hardware support, as noted
in Sec. 3.4.4, and it imposes constraints to the matmul
scheduling.
• Whether this fusion-optimized scheduling yields end-
to-end latency improvements depends on the Trans-
former and underlying hardware parameters. In par-
ticular, we observe that: (1) size of the on-chip SRAM
buffer for output activation; and (2) sequence length
matter.
• We consistently observe that overlapping the execu-
tion of query × key matmul with Softmax in the MHA
block reduces latency up to 78%, compared to execut-
ing the two operations separately on a systolic array
accelerator. On the other hand, scheduling to overlap
the FFN 𝑊2 projection with the following LayerNorm
hurts performance by 27%.

6
ADAPTING TRANSFORMER
ARCHITECTURE WITH NAS

So far, we have conducted an in-depth exploration of the full-stack
aspect of DNN inferencing, with a focus on the Transformer archi-
tecture, from the hardware level to optimization and scheduling
strategies to improve their inference performance. Another im-
portant avenue in full stack optimization of DNNs is obviously
to optimize DNN architecture itself and to tailor it for a specific
hardware platform.
In this section, we will primarily focus on automated neural
architecture search (NAS) as a method for designing DNNs. Sec. 6.1

in valid DNN architecture, and therefore it has been widely adopted
in follow-up works [142, 182]

Search Space

Conv 3x3

Sample

Evaluation

Search
Method

Conv 1x1

Method

6.1.2
Search Method. Since the NAS search space is usually too
large for an exhaustive search, efficient search methods are neces-
sary to ensure overall performance. In early work on NAS, RL-based
methods were used as the search method [16, 170, 250, 254, 255]
(Fig. 24, a). At a high level, RL-based NAS frameworks contain the
controller (i.e., RL agent) that takes an action of sampling DNN
architectures, whose evaluation accuracy after training is fed into
the controller as a reward signal to refine its sampling policy. The
controller can be trained using different RL algorithms such as
policy gradient [254] or Q-learning [16].
An alternative search strategy for NAS is evolutionary search [141,
182] (Fig. 24, b). Here one initializes a population of different DNN
architectures, which are then mutated (e.g., by adding, removing, or
changing layers), evaluated, and selected based on their validation
accuracy in every evolution step. This generates a new population
for the subsequent evolution step. The search cost for evolutionary
search can be quite expensive, as it requires validating all DNNs
in the population for every evolution step. Therefore, it is often
coupled with various methods to reduce validation costs such as
weight sharing. These will be discussed in more detail in Sec. 6.1.3.
The aforementioned methods can be regarded as a black-box
optimization problem over a discrete search space. Due to the dis-
crete nature of the search space with a large number of tunable
knobs, the search cost can become prohibitively large. This is fur-
ther exacerbated by the long evaluation time of a single RL or
evolution iteration, which often requires training from scratch. For
instance, RL-based NASNet [255] and evolutionary search-based
AmoebaNet [182] require a few thousands of GPU hours for end-to-
end search [183]. In contrast, DARTS [142] proposes the continuous
relaxation of the search space, which allows them to efficiently
explore and optimize the search space through gradient-based op-
timization methods (Fig. 24, c). In essence, DARTS introduces a
trainable weight to allow for a weighted average of multiple oper-
ations, instead of requiring a selection of a single operation. This
weight can be trained alongside other model parameters during
training, and it can eventually converge to favor a particular oper-
ation over the others. This method reduces the search cost from
thousands of GPU hours in the preceding RL or evolutionary search
based methods to a few hours. Due to the search efficiency, the
gradient based search has become a popular choice for many NAS
frameworks [219, 228].

ReLU

…

Candidate
Architectures

Evaluate

Accuracy
HW
metrics
Improve Search Quality

Figure 23: Illustration of the general structure of NAS frameworks.
Candidate DNN architectures are sampled from the search space
according to the search method, and then they are evaluated. The
evaluation result is then used by the search method to guide better
exploration of architectures in the search space.

However, this incurs a large overhead, and more efficient methods
of estimating performance are often used as a proxy for the final
accuracy. Fig. 23 schematically shows these different components.
Below, we discuss each of these components in more detail. Note
that the main purpose of this section is not to conduct a thorough
survey of existing works, but instead to provide a broader overview
on various methodologies for improving NAS from a practitioner’s
standpoint. We refer readers to [18, 61, 183, 193] for more compre-
hensive survey on NAS.

6.1.1
Search Space. The search space for NAS defines a set of
valid DNN architectures over which the NAS framework can search.
Designing a proper search space is critical, as its size and cover-
age can directly affect the final outcome of the NAS framework.
One naive principle of designing a search space is the layer-wise
search [26, 77, 254] where each layer (or operation) can be searched
independently from other layers. For instance, in [254], the RNN
controller model produces a description of individual layer in a
sequence to construct a candidate DNN architecture.
However, the layer-wise search space often suffers from the large
search space size that grows exponentially with the depth of candi-
date architectures, and this could degrade the search efficiency and
the final performance. The cell-wise search [54, 141, 170, 250, 255]
can alleviate this shortcoming by searching cells (i.e., blocks or
modules that consist of multiple layers) rather than an entire archi-
tecture, which can later be stacked up repeatedly to compose an
architecture. This is motivated by many successful hand-designed
DNN architectures that consist of repeating cells or blocks of a
similar structure [82, 89]. NASNet [255] is one of the earliest works
that proposes to search two types of cells: the normal cell, which
stacks up multiple times without changing spatial resolution; and
the reduction cell, which is inserted once every fixed number of
repeated normal cells, in order to reduce the spatial dimension to-
wards the output layers. This significantly reduces the search time
by 7× compared to the previous layer-wise search method proposed
by the same authors [254]. Likewise, the cell-wise search space sub-
stantially reduces the search space (as cells are much smaller than
the whole network) by imposing an additional structural constraint

6.1.3
Weight Sharing and Supernetwork. One of the main
challenges with NAS methods is the prohibitive training cost. To
address this, ENAS [170] proposed weight sharing. ENAS views a
DNN model as a directed acyclic graph, where the nodes represent
the computation with their own trainable weights and the edges
represent the information flow from one node to another. Then, an
individual candidate DNN can be regarded as a sub-network of a
larger, over-parameterized super-network (supernet). This redefines
NAS as a process of searching for good sub-networks sampled from
the supernet whose weights are shared across all sub-networks.
Once the supernet is trained, its sub-networks can be sampled and

Population

Population

Accuracy

3x3
≈

3x3
1x1

3x3
1x1

Sample
Evaluate

Mutate

Evaluate
Select

Policy

x0.9
x0.1

x0.6
x0.4

FLOPs

Before Training
After Training

Reward

Reinitialize Population

(a) RL based NAS
(c) Gradient based NAS
(b) Evolutionary Search based NAS

Figure 24: Comparison of different NAS search methods. (a) RL-based methods employ a controller that samples architectures based on a
policy, which is reinforced by the evaluation results of the sampled architecture as a reward. (b) Evolutionary search-based methods initialize a
population, sample them based on the evaluation results, and then generate a next-round population by mutating the remaining architectures. (c)
Gradient-based methods (e.g., continuous relaxation) train weights along with model parameters that are multiplied to each operation choice.
After the training, the weights are converged to favor a particular operation over the others, thus approximating the sampled architecture.

to other tasks in a similar domain. This premise has been chal-
lenged by some of the recent NAS work [26]. Supernet-based NAS
algorithms can be a good alternative to avoiding the use of proxy
tasks [17, 25, 26, 77, 142, 228, 243]. These algorithms require only
a single iteration of supernet training, which can be performed
directly on large-scale datasets without prohibitive compute re-
quirements.

evaluated without the need to train the models from scratch. This
significantly reduces the overall search cost.
This method, also known as the supernet-based NAS, was picked
up by several subsequent algorithms [17, 25, 26, 77, 142, 228, 243].
In particular, Single Path One-Shot NAS [77] constructs a supernet
by stacking the choice blocks. The choice block consists of multiple
operation choices (e.g., convolution with different kernel sizes or
skip operation) from which a single operation can be selected at a
time. For every training step, a different sub-network is obtained
and trained by uniformly sampling one operation for each choice
block, expecting all sub-networks with different permutations of
choices to be trained fully and equally. After training, an evolu-
tionary algorithm is applied to search optimal sub-networks from
the supernet, without paying the expensive costs of from-scratch
training.
However, the accuracy of sub-networks obtained from a fully-
trained supernet is typically inferior to the same model architec-
tures trained from scratch in a stand-alone fashion [17]. There-
fore, the discovered sub-network architectures often need to be
re-trained. To address this, Once-For-All [25] proposes the progres-
sive shrinking algorithm, and BigNAS [243] proposes the sandwich
rule and in-place distillation. Both aim to train a supernet in a way
that its sub-networks can achieve good accuracy (i.e., comparable
accuracy to the from-scratch trained counterparts) without an addi-
tional training process. These methods can have a high value from
a practical standpoint as sub-networks can be sampled (e.g., via
evolutionary search) and immediately deployed.

Summary (Sec. 6.1. NAS): Neural architecture search
(NAS) is a promising alternative to hand-designing effi-
cient DNNs. NAS consists of: (1) a search space that defines
valid candidate architectures; (2) a search method that de-
fines how to efficiently explore the search space; and (3) an
evaluation method for evaluating the goodness of candidate
architectures. Despite its potential, NAS presents its own
set of challenges, which often necessitate manual tuning of
the search space, and which can be prohibitively expensive
in terms of time and resources. To address this, many recent
advances in the NAS community have focused on improv-
ing search efficiency. Notable methodologies include: (1)
the cell-based search that confines the search space size;
(2) the continuous relaxation of the search space that al-
lows efficient gradient-based optimization methods; (3) the
weight sharing scheme across candidate architectures; and
(4) faster evaluation methods for the candidate architecture
performance.

6.2
Hardware-aware NAS

6.1.4
Evaluation Method. One needs a metric to evaluate sam-
pled architectures on a validation dataset to rank the “goodness” of
candidate architectures. The early NAS algorithms [16, 254] fully
trained sampled architectures until convergence, which is not fea-
sible for large datasets. A widely adopted strategy for applying
NAS to larger-scale tasks is to discover an accurate cell architec-
ture using a smaller dataset (e.g., CIFAR-10 in computer vision)
and then apply it to building a larger model for a larger dataset
(e.g., ImageNet) [140, 142, 149, 182, 210]. The premise here is that a
DNN architecture optimized for one task can be transferred well

Hardware-aware NAS aims to optimize not only the accuracy of
DNNs but also the various performance metrics (such as latency,
energy consumption, or memory usage) on target hardware plat-
forms. One key question here is how to incorporate these metrics
into learning. It is often difficult to quickly measure the latency or
energy consumption of a candidate model. As such, most works
in the literature only consider FLOPs or total number of parame-
ters. However, as also discussed above in Sec. 2.2, FLOPs does not

necessarily have a correlation with latency or energy. Therefore,
multiple hardware-aware NAS frameworks have been introduced
to directly consider latency instead, or to use approximate metrics
for measuring it (e.g., measuring latency of individual layers and
accumulating them to approximate total latency, as opposed to mea-
suring the end-to-end runtime). Here, we discuss popular strategies
to incorporate hardware performance into NAS frameworks. For a
more exhaustive survey on hardware-aware NAS techniques and
their algorithmic details, see [18].
The most straightforward way is to directly measure hardware
performance and bring it as an additional optimization objective
for NAS frameworks [138, 210]. For instance, MNasNet [210] ex-
tends the existing RL-based NAS framework to the multi-objective
optimization setting. It aims to maximize accuracy, while limit-
ing latency on the target platform to less than a certain target
latency. Instead of solving the multi-purpose optimization problem,
it combines the two objectives (accuracy and latency) into a single
objective, by taking a weighted product. This modified objective is
then provided as a reward for updating the controller. By directly
optimizing latency on the target platform, MNasNet finds DNN
architectures that are ∼2× faster than MobileNetV2 [188] and NAS-
Net [255] with a comparable ImageNet classification accuracy on a
Pixel phone.
Another notable work is MCUNet [138] that targets searching
DNNs for resource-constrained microcontrollers. Unlike GPUs or
mobile devices, microcontrollers for tiny IoT devices lack large
memory and storage. As a result, it is critical to design a model that
fits their tight memory budgets. MCUNet incorporates its supernet-
based NAS framework [17, 77] with TinyEngine, a lightweight
inference engine that the authors have developed as part of the
project. In this way, MCUNet samples sub-networks for every evolu-
tionary step and feeds them to TinyEngine to optimize the memory
scheduling and measure the optimal memory usage.
However, due to the limited number of available devices, measur-
ing hardware performance directly can be slow and not paralleliz-
able [238]. Furthermore, it is not possible to pre-measure the hard-
ware performance for all possible DNNs in the search space [228].
To overcome this issue, some of the hardware-aware NAS methods
incorporate operation-wise lookup tables [219, 228, 238]. Rather
than storing the end-to-end hardware performance, the lookup ta-
ble only contains pre-measured performance numbers of individual
operations which can be summed up to estimate the overall per-
formance of a given DNN. In FBNet [228], for instance, the latency
number estimated from a lookup table is used as a regularizer term
in its gradient based NAS framework to penalize operations that
would be slow on the target hardware device.
Finally, some hardware-aware NAS frameworks rely on light-
weight prediction models that can quickly predict hardware perfor-
mance numbers for a given DNN. For instance, ProxylessNAS [26]
has trained a model that takes as inputs a DNN configuration (e.g.,
operation types, input and output shapes, and other operation at-
tributes like kernel sizes) and outputs the estimated latency on the
target hardware platform.

Summary (Sec. 6.2. HW-Aware NAS): Hardware effi-
ciency metrics can be coupled with NAS loss function to
find an architecture that considers both accuracy as well
as latency (or similar metrics). While directly measuring
performance metrics on a real hardware environment is the
most accurate method, it can be slow and poorly paralleliz-
able. Instead, the hardware performance can be estimated
in high accuracy using an operation-wise lookup table or
by training a simple prediction model.

Table 7: Summary of existing literature on Transformer-specific NAS
techniques. SPOS and OFA stand for Single Path One-Shot [77] and
Once-for-All [25], respectively.

Name
Domain
Search
Search
Weight
Space
Method
sharing

Cell
EA
×
HAT [222]
Layer
EA
OFA [25]
NAS-BERT [235]
Layer
EA
SPOS [77]
Primer [201]
Cell
EA
×

Evolved Tfm. [200]

NLP

Layer
EA
SPOS [77]
GLiT [30]
Layer
EA
SPOS [77]
ViT-ResNAS [135]
Layer
EA
SPOS [77]
NAS-ViT [73]
Layer
EA
BigNAS [243]
BurgerFormer [236]
Layer
EA
SPOS [77]

Autoformer [230]

CV

6.3
Transformer-specific NAS

Early work on NAS focused on CNN models mostly for computer
vision applications. However, after the Transformer architecture
was introduced and matured enough to achieve state-of-the-art
results not just for NLP tasks but also for other tasks, several works
started to explore NAS methods to find more efficient alternatives.
With the introduction and maturation of the Transformer architec-
ture, which allowed for state-of-the-art results on a variety of tasks,
a number of recent works have begun to explore the use of NAS
methods to find more efficient alternatives. As the Transformer
architecture was initially developed for NLP tasks, the earliest NAS
works for Transformers were primarily in this domain.
Evolved Transformer [200] was one of the earliest attempts to
apply NAS for searching better Transformer architectures, and
it did so via an evolutionary search algorithm. Inspired by NAS-
Net [255], Evolved Transformer adopts the cell-wise search space
to search two cell structures. Each of these cell structures can be
stacked for multiple times to form the encoder and decoder of
the encoder-decoder Transformer architecture. The cell structure
contains a stack of multiple blocks, and each block has its own
hyperparameters such as operation type, normalization type, and
dimensions which can be searched. The main challenge here is
that NLP tasks require a much longer time to train and evaluate
(e.g., the popular WMT 2014 En-De translation benchmark contains
over 3 million sentence pairs). Furthermore, unlike the previous
works [140, 142, 149, 182, 210] for CNNs that found CIFAR-10 to
be a reasonable proxy for much larger ImageNet, these NLP tasks

Table 8: NAS Search Space.

do not typically have good smaller proxy tasks. To address this,
Evolved Transformer proposes to dynamically allocate resources
to more promising architectures by early stopping those who fail
to achieve the hurdle fitness within a small number of steps.
Due to the large computational cost of training Transformers on
NLP tasks, weight sharing and supernet based NAS have become
popular options. HAT [222] extends the Once-for-All [25] scheme
to Transformer architectures to train a single supernet from which
sub-networks with different depths, number of heads, and dimen-
sions can be sampled. Furthermore, HAT is hardware-aware, in
that it directly optimizes for latency along with accuracy using a
multi-layer latency prediction model. HAT shares the benefits of
Once-for-All, which allows sub-networks to be sampled through
evolutionary search and deployed immediately to target hardware
devices without retraining.
NAS-BERT [235] is another supernet based NAS for Transform-
ers that extends Single Path One-Shot [77]. Different from the
aforementioned methods, NAS-BERT proposes a NAS method that
can be applied at the pre-training stage of encoder-only BERT so as
to be agnostic to downstream tasks. In order to avoid the prohibitive
cost of directly performing architecture search in a big supernet on
the heavy pre-training task, NAS-BERT employs two novel tech-
niques: (1) block-wise training, that splits the entire supernet into
multiple blocks of successive Transformer layers which are then
trained separately; and (2) progressive shrinking, that dynamically
prunes less promising sub-networks based on their validation loss.
Primer [201] searches for a more efficient decoder-only Trans-
former for auto-regressive language modeling. Unlike the majority
of NAS methods that view a model as a connection of multiple
operations selected from a NAS search space, Primer views it as a
single valid Tensorflow (TF) program comprised of fine-grained TF
primitive operations like addition, exponential, convolution, and
many others. Using evolutionary search, it targets to search a TF
program defining a decoder block that can be stacked multiple
times to form an auto-regressive language model. The hope is that
this minimizes inductive bias when designing the search space, as
the possible set of operations and their connectivity are no longer
pre-determined by human experts. In order to reduce the heavy
computational cost of auto-regressive pre-training, Primer brings
the idea of hurdles of Evolved Transformer [200]. Additionally, it
uses relatively small LM1B dataset as a proxy task to discover model
architecture, which is then transferred to much larger target tasks
such as PG-19 [176] and C4 [178].
The Transformer architecture, initially developed for NLP tasks,
has been adapted for use in the field of CV. Referred to as Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [56, 144, 215], these models have been demon-
strated to outperform popular CNN architectures in various CV
applications, thus driving research towards the development of NAS
techniques to automatically design better ViT architectures. How-
ever, due to the architectural similarities, these works have much
in common with the NAS methodologies for NLP-targeted Trans-
formers. For instance, Autoformer [230] and ViT-ResNAS [135] are
extensions of Single Path One-Shot [77] to the ViT search space,
including depth, hidden dimensions, and the number of heads of
each Transformer layer. Burgerformer [236] takes a step further to
take into account the micro design, i.e., the type of operations, acti-
vations, and normalization, as well. NASViT extends BigNAS [243]

Parameter
Range of Values

𝑁
{3, 4, 5, 6}
ℎ
{4, 6, 8, 10, 12}
𝑑
384 −768, step size=96
𝑑FFN
768 −3072, step size=128

and AlphaNet [221] to apply the sandwich sampling rule to train a
supernet. GLiT [30] proposes a hierarchical NAS scheme for search-
ing hybrid convolution-attention architectures. It determines the
number of convolutional and multi-head attention heads in each
layer in the first stage of NAS, as well as the detailed hyperparame-
ters such as dimensions in the second stage.
One noticeable characteristic of most of the NAS methods intro-
duced above for Transformer architectures (both for NLP and CV
applications) is their use of supernet-based, weight-shared method-
ologies, which is summarized in Tab. 7. This is presumably due to
the immense computational cost associated with training Trans-
former architectures. The use of supernet-based NAS can limit the
range of architectures that can be discovered, due to the large con-
straints it imposes on the search space, which may prevent the
discovery of unique or innovative architectures. Therefore, there is
a need to explore better ways to balance the flexibility and efficiency
of NAS techniques.

Summary (Sec. 6.3. Transformer-specific NAS): The
existing NAS frameworks have been extended to design
more efficient Transformer architectures. Due to the large
computational cost for training Transformer models, which
is even further exacerbated when combined with unsuper-
vised pre-training methodologies, most of the existing meth-
ods heavily rely on the weight-sharing scheme followed
by evolutionary search. A key challenge in Transformer-
specific NAS is that existing work is primarily limited to
tuning relatively trivial hyperparameters such as hidden
dimensions, depth, and number of heads. However, this
is likely to preclude the discovery of novel Transformer
variants.

6.4
Case Study: Running NAS and Co-design
on the Transformer

So far, we have discussed the general concept of NAS, its applica-
tion to hardware-aware scenarios, and its extension into the Trans-
former architecture. Here, we conduct a case study to demonstrate
the performance gains of applying NAS to Transformer inference
on Gemmini, with the goal of optimizing not only accuracy, but
also hardware costs such as latency and energy.

6.4.1
Experiment Setup. As a baseline architecture, we use a 6-
layer Transformer architecture with all other model configurations
remaining the same as BERT-Base or GPT-2 (see the details in Tab. 1).
We consider Language Modeling task, and we train a randomly
initialized model on the WikiText-2 [154] benchmark with 37k
training examples and 4k validation examples using a language

Table 9: Sample Architecture found using NAS with 3.6 × 109 EDP
and 22.51 perplexity.

modeling training objective. To evaluate the model performance, we
measured perplexity on the validation examples, excluding empty
strings, where lower scores indicate better performance. The stand-
alone baseline model was trained for 50 epochs with the Adam
optimizer and a linear learning rate scheduling with a peak learning
rate in the range {5, 2, 1, 0.5} × 10−5. The training examples are
concatenated to reach a maximum sequence length of 512 and
batched using a batch size of 16.
For NAS, we adopt the BigNAS-style [243] strategy to train a
supernet, and then we used an evolutionary algorithm to search
sub-networks out of the fully trained supernet. The NAS search
space is comprised of various combinations of the number of layers
𝑙, number of heads ℎ, hidden dimension 𝑑, and FFN dimension
𝑑FFN (see Tab. 8 for details). For supernet training, we use the same
training hyperparameters as the stand-alone training, except that
in each training iteration, we sample four sub-networks: the largest
possible; the smallest possible; and two randomly sampled sub-
networks. The model parameter update is then performed using the
sandwich rule, which involves taking the average of the gradients
collected from the backward paths of these four sub-networks.
For the evolutionary search, we initialize a population of 40
sub-networks and perform 40 rounds of evolution iterations. In
each iteration, the validation perplexity and energy-delay-product
(EDP) of each sub-network on the target hardware are collected,
and only the sub-networks that are Pareto-optimal are retained.
Here, we use EDP as a single hardware cost metric, as it allows for
the conversion of a multi-objective optimization problem into a
single-objective optimization problem, by combining both latency
and energy into one metric. The retained sub-networks are then
mutated with a mutation probability of 0.2 to refill the population
for the next iteration. To measure the hardware cost, we use a
lookup table-based method for quickly assessing the latency and
energy consumption of each sub-network on the target hardware,
instead of using RTL (Register Transfer Logic) simulation, which
can be time-consuming. The entries in the lookup table are obtained
from Timeloop [163] simulations, which provide simulated latency
and energy numbers for each operation. The end-to-end latency
and energy are then estimated by summing the per-operation costs.
After the evolutionary search, the Pareto-optimal sub-networks
are then evaluated with an RTL simulator to obtain a more precise
estimation of the latency. For the energy measure, we continue to
use the numbers from Timeloop, as it is technically challenging to
measure the energy consumption via RTL.
For the target hardware, we use Gemmini with the optimizations
applied in Sec. 3.4 with the dedicated normalization units for run-
ning non-linear operations on-chip. We configure Gemmini with a
scratchpad size of 64 kB and accumulator size of 256 kB based on
the insights in Sec. 3.4.3 to maximize the accumulator size.

Parameter
Values

𝑁
6
ℎ
[12, 6, 12, 8, 10, 6]
𝑑
672
𝑑FFN
[1280, 1280, 2560, 768, 2048, 1024]

corresponds to the largest Transformer architecture in our search
space in Tab. 8.
We first present results from the evolutionary search process
over EDP in Fig. 26. As can be seen in the plot, the NAS framework
allows us to obtain multiple Transformer architectures with better
hardware cost to perplexity trade-offs. That is, it finds architec-
tures with similar or even better perplexity, as compared to the
baseline with smaller hardware costs. As an example, we select
the architecture with the lowest EDP while having less than +0.1
perplexity loss, whose EDP is 3.6 × 109 and perplexity is 22.51.
The architecture parameters are listed in Table 9. This architecture
illustrates the importance of a diverse search space, as the number
of attention heads varies from 6 to 12 in each layer, and as the fully
connected layer dimensions vary from 768 to 2560. By being able
to change these parameters on a per-layer basis, one may discover
more Pareto-optimal architectures compared to if these parameters
were fixed for every layer.
In Fig. 25, we separate out latency and energy, and substitute in
RTL values for the latency. As one can see, it is possible to attain a
1.4× reduction in latency versus the baseline Transformer trained
from scratch with 0.1 point perplexity degradation. If one could
tolerate about one point degradation in perplexity, latency can be
reduced by 2.4×, and possibly even further with more advanced ar-
chitecture search techniques. With regards to energy, one can attain
a 1.6× improvement considering 0.1 point perplexity degradation,
and 4.4× if perplexity is allowed to increase by 1 point. Taking both
together, it is possible to reduce EDP by 2.2× with just 0.1 point per-
plexity degradation, and 10.6× with 1 point perplexity degradation.
These examples illustrate the power of co-design in allowing practi-
tioners to choose a combination that best matches their needs. It is
important to note that this represents a single run of our co-design
methodology on a specific hardware platform, and results may vary
depending on the target hardware and optimization goals.

Summary (Sec. 6.4. NAS for Transformers Case
Study): This case study used a supernet-based NAS to sam-
ple diverse architectures followed by an evolutionary search
to discover Pareto-optimal architectures that trade-off be-
tween perplexity and energy-delay-product, a measure of
runtime efficiency. Many discovered architectures have sig-
nificant latency and energy improvements compared to the
baseline trained from scratch when running on an opti-
mized Gemmini hardware accelerator. The importance of
using NAS to explore the search space is underscored by the
fact that many well-performing architectures use diverse

6.4.2
Experiment Results. We show the NAS Pareto-frontier
results for both latency and energy in Fig. 25 (blue curves) where
each point corresponds to a different Transformer architecture that
has been found from the evolutionary search algorithm discussed
above. Additionally, we plot the baseline 6-layer Transformer model
trained from scratch as a reference (× mark). All the EDP values
are normalized with the baseline EDP. Note that the baseline model

NAS Results: Latency vs. Perplexity
(Scratchpad 64kB, Accumulator: 256kB)

NAS Results: Latency vs. Energy
(Scratchpad 64kB, Accumulator: 256kB)

NAS
Trained from scratch

NAS
Trained from scratch

25.0

25.0

24.5

24.5

Perplexity

Perplexity

24.0

24.0

+1 Perplexity

+1 Perplexity

23.5

23.5

23.0

23.0

+0.1 Perplexity

+0.1 Perplexity

22.5

22.5

20
40
60
80
100
120
Latency (109 Cycles)

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Energy (10
3 J)

Figure 25: (Left) Latency-perplexity and (Right) Energy-perplexity plots of the Transformer architectures found via evolutionary search on our
optimal Gemmini hardware configuration. Similar to Fig. 26, lower perplexity indicates better performance, and we plot lines to illustrate +0.1 and
+1 point perplexity degradation.

NAS Results: Latency vs. Normalized EDP

limited understanding of the run-time characteristics and bottle-
necks of Transformer workloads, as well as the design principles
necessary for effectively running these models, in comparison to
CNN architectures.
In this paper, we have conducted a comprehensive analysis of
Transformer workloads, in order to better understand run-time
characteristics and identify performance bottlenecks of Transform-
ers running on commodity hardware and accelerators (Sec. 2). Fur-
thermore, we have performed an extensive survey of the current
hardware and software solutions, with the goal of identifying po-
tential optimization opportunities in the full-stack deployment of
Transformers. Specifically, our survey covered the following topics:

(Scratchpad 64kB, Accumulator: 256kB)

NAS
Trained from scratch

25.0

24.5

24.0

Perplexity

+1 Perplexity

23.5

23.0

+0.1 Perplexity

22.5

22.0

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
EDP (Normalized)

• The design of hardware architectures for Transformer inference,
including the impact of the non-linear operations on designing
hardware accelerators (Sec. 3);
• Optimization strategies such as pruning and quantization that
can be applied to a fixed Transformer architecture for better
performance (Sec. 4);
• Mapping and scheduling of operations in the Transformer ar-
chitecture and the associated challenges (Sec. 5); and
• The use of automated NAS for designing more efficient Trans-
former architectures and adapting them to target hardware
(Sec. 6.1).

Figure 26: EDP-perplexity plots of the Transformer architectures
found via evolutionary search on our Gemmini hardware configu-
ration. Lower perplexity indicates better performance of the trained
models. For better comparison, we additionally plot lines to illustrate
+0.1 and +1 point perplexity degradation.

layer configurations. When trained on WikiText-2 language
modeling benchmark, these techniques found Transformer
architectures with a 2.2× EDP reduction while tolerating a
0.1 point perplexity degradation, and 10.6× with a 1 point
degradation over the baseline.

The key findings from this study include:

• Despite the small FLOPs count, the nonlinear operations in
Transformers can be highly influential on overall performance,
if they are not taken into account properly when designing
domain-specific accelerators. The computation of nonlinear
operations such as Softmax and LayerNorm also requires com-
puting runtime statistics, whereas the BatchNorm operations
in CNNs can be absorbed into prior convolutional layers dur-
ing inference.
• Hardware design for CNNs may not necessarily be the same as
that for Transformers. For instance, increasing the accumulator
sizes to enable higher output reuse yielded significant perfor-
mance improvement in Gemmini for Transformer applications.
• It appears less complex to schedule matmuls in Transformers
than convolutions in CNNs, due to the fact that scheduling
matmuls involves 3 loops, as compared to 6 for convolutions.

7
CONCLUSION

The Transformer architecture [217] has revolutionized the field of
natural language understanding [52, 125, 143, 173, 174, 177, 240],
which has been further accelerated with the recent development of
large language models with hundreds of billions of parameters [22,
44, 58, 86, 175, 190, 198]. This architecture has also been extended to
a wide range of fields, including computer vision [24, 36, 130, 152],
and speech recognition [23, 76, 109]. While Transformer models
have shown significant performance improvements, their growing
size and run-time complexity present a critical challenge in efficient
inference. While DNN accelerators that enable fast and efficient
deep learning computation can be a viable solution, there is still

reflect the position or the policy of our sponsors, and no official
endorsement should be inferred.

However, we observed that scheduling matmuls involve similar
amounts of decision points and a wide range of performance
outcomes, making it as challenging as scheduling convolutions.
• Fusing LayerNorms with the preceding matmuls in the Trans-
former architecture imposes several constraints on the mapping,
particularly related to tile sizes. As a result, careful considera-
tion must be taken when deciding whether to fuse operations,
contrary to the common belief that operator fusion is gener-
ally beneficial.

REFERENCES

[1] Edge TPU. Accessed: 2018-12-05.
[2] Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue.
chatgpt/, 2022.
[3] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jef-
frey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard,
et al. {TensorFlow}: a system for {Large-Scale} machine learning. In USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2016.
[4] Dennis Abts, John Kim, Garrin Kimmell, Matthew Boyd, Kris Kang, Sahil Parmar,
Andrew Ling, Andrew Bitar, Ibrahim Ahmed, and Jonathan Ross. The groq
software-defined scale-out tensor streaming multiprocessor: From chips-to-
systems architectural overview. In IEEE Hot Chips Symposium, pages 1–69,
2022.
[5] Aravind Acharya, Uday Bondhugula, and Albert Cohen. An approach for
finding permutations quickly: Fusion and dimension matching. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.10726, 2018.
[6] Aravind Acharya, Uday Bondhugula, and Albert Cohen.
Polyhedral auto-
transformation with no integer linear programming. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation
(PLDI), 2018.
[7] Andrew Adams, Karima Ma, Luke Anderson, Riyadh Baghdadi, Tzu-Mao Li,
Michael Gharbi, Benoit Steiner, Steven Johnson, Kayvon Fatahalian, Frédo Du-
rand, and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. Learning to optimize halide with tree search
and random programs. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2019.
[8] Vahideh Akhlaghi, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, Kambiz Samadi, Rajesh K. Gupta, and
Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. Snapea: Predictive early activation for reducing computa-
tion in deep convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, page 662–673, 2018.
[9] Jorge Albericio, Patrick Judd, Tayler Hetherington, Tor Aamodt, Natalie Enright
Jerger, and Andreas Moshovos. Cnvlutin: Ineffectual-neuron-free deep neural
network computing. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on
Computer Architecture, 2016.
[10] Manoj Alwani, Han Chen, Michael Ferdman, and Peter Milder. Fused-layer cnn
accelerators. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO), 2016.
[11] Jason Ansel, Shoaib Kamil, Kalyan Veeramachaneni, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley,
Jeffrey Bosboom, Una-May O’Reilly, and Saman Amarasinghe. Opentuner: An
extensible framework for program autotuning. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT), 2014.
[12] ARM. Cortex-M,
2020.
[13] Giorgos Armeniakos, Georgios Zervakis, Dimitrios Soudris, and Jörg Henkel.
Hardware approximate techniques for deep neural network accelerators: A
survey. ACM Comput. Surv., mar 2022. Just Accepted.
[14] R. Baghdadi, J. Ray, M. B. Romdhane, E. D. Sozzo, A. Akkas, Y. Zhang, P. Suriana,
S. Kamil, and S. Amarasinghe. Tiramisu: A polyhedral compiler for expressing
fast and portable code. In International Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization (CGO), 2019.
[15] Riyadh Baghdadi, Ulysse Beaugnon, Albert Cohen, Tobias Grosser, Michael
Kruse, Chandan Reddy, Sven Verdoolaege, Adam Betts, Alastair F. Donald-
son, Jeroen Ketema, Javed Absar, Sven Van Haastregt, Alexey Kravets, Anton
Lokhmotov, Robert David, and Elnar Hajiyev. Pencil: A platform-neutral com-
pute intermediate language for accelerator programming. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques
(PACT), 2015.
[16] Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing
neural network architectures using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02167, 2016.
[17] Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc
Le. Understanding and simplifying one-shot architecture search. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 550–559. PMLR, 2018.
[18] Hadjer Benmeziane, Kaoutar El Maghraoui, Hamza Ouarnoughi, Smail Niar,
Martin Wistuba, and Naigang Wang. A comprehensive survey on hardware-
aware neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09336, 2021.
[19] Pierre Blanchard, Desmond J Higham, and Nicholas J Higham. Accurately
computing the log-sum-exp and softmax functions. IMA Journal of Numerical
Analysis, 41(4):2311–2330, 08 2020.
[20] Uday Bondhugula, Aravind Acharya, and Albert Cohen. The pluto+ algorithm:
A practical approach for parallelization and locality optimization of affine loop
nests. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS),
2016.
[21] Uday Bondhugula, Albert Hartono, Jagannathan Ramanujam, and Ponnuswamy
Sadayappan. A practical automatic polyhedral parallelizer and locality optimizer.

Finally, throughout the paper, we conducted case studies to quan-
tify the advantages of co-design and co-optimization techniques
across the stack on full-stack Transformer inference. Overall, the re-
sult exhibited 88.7× EDP improvement without a noticeable perfor-
mance drop compared to a naive implementation without full-stack
considerations.

• In Sec. 3.4, we applied hardware design techniques in order
to avoid the high communication overhead associated with
offloading unsupported operations to the host CPU. Gemmini
was originally designed for CNN workloads, and making it
perform Softmax, LayerNorm, and GELU on-chip required addi-
tional changes. Our implementation of dedicated normalization
units to support Softmax and LayerNorm had an associated
5−15% area cost and 8% latency increase. Nonetheless, this
extra overhead was compensated by the gain achieved by run-
ning the nonlinear operations on-chip using the polynomial
approximation proposed in I-BERT [111]. Combined with mem-
ory hierarchy re-balancing, this provided a net 39.6× latency
reduction.
• In Section 6.4, we ran NAS to search for Pareto-optimal Trans-
former architectures given the tradeoff between EDP and per-
plexity on a popular language modeling task. We used Timeloop
simulated numbers to estimate the cost of various architectures
within a large search space and guide the automated NAS pro-
cess. The total contribution as shown in Fig. 25 is 2.24× EDP
reduction without a noticeable perplexity drop, and 10.56× EDP
reduction with 1 perplexity drop.

We anticipate that our in-depth analysis and results, along with
the comprehensive survey presented in this paper will facilitate
further advencements in understanding Transformer inference and
optimizing its inference efficiency from various angles. We believe
that this will enable Transformers to reach their full potential and
expand their application to a much wider range of areas than what
they have achieved so far.

8
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge gracious support from Meta and in particular
Michael Anderson, Satish Nadathur and Summer Deng, as well as
Google Cloud, Google TRC team, and specifically Jonathan Caton,
Prof. David Patterson, and Jing Li. Prof. Keutzer’s lab is sponsored
by Intel corporation, Intel VLAB team, Intel One-API center of
excellence, as well as funding through BDD and BAIR. Sehoon Kim
would like to acknowledge the support from Korea Foundation for
Advanced Studies (KFAS). Amir Gholami was supported through
funding from Samsung SAIT. Michael W. Mahoney would also like
to acknowledge a J. P. Morgan Chase Faculty Research Award as
well as the DOE, NSF, and ONR. Our conclusions do not necessarily

Micro, 41(2):29–35, 2021.
[44] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gau-
rav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
[45] L.T. Clark, V. Vashishtha, L. Shifren, A. Gujia, S. Sinha, B. Cline, C. Ramamurthya,
and G. Yeric. ASAP7: A 7-nm FinFET Predictive Process Design Kit. Microelec-
tronics Journal, 2016.
[46] Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-
length context. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 2978–2988, 2019.
[47] Shail Dave, Riyadh Baghdadi, Tony Nowatzki, Sasikanth Avancha, Aviral Shri-
vastava, and Baoxin Li. Hardware acceleration of sparse and irregular tensor
computations of ml models: A survey and insights. Proceedings of the IEEE,
109(10):1706–1752, 2021.
[48] Shail Dave, Youngbin Kim, Sasikanth Avancha, Kyoungwoo Lee, and Aviral
Shrivastava. DMazeRunner: Executing perfectly nested loops on dataflow
accelerators. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, 2019.
[49] Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and Yuan Xie. Model compres-
sion and hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 108(4):485–532, 2020.
[50] Jérémie Detrey and Florent de Dinechin. A parameterized floating-point expo-
nential function for fpgas. In Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Conference on
Field-Programmable Technology, 2005., pages 27–34. IEEE, 2005.
[51] Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Gpt3. int8
(): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
[52] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[53] William B Dolan and Chris Brockett. Automatically constructing a corpus of
sentential paraphrases. In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on
Paraphrasing (IWP2005), 2005.
[54] Jin-Dong Dong, An-Chieh Cheng, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Min Sun. Dpp-
net: Device-aware progressive search for pareto-optimal neural architectures.
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages
517–531, 2018.
[55] Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
HAWQ: Hessian aware quantization of neural networks with mixed-precision.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages
293–302, 2019.
[56] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xi-
aohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg
Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[57] Petros Drineas and Michael W Mahoney. Lectures on randomized numerical
linear algebra. In The Mathematics of Data, IAS/Park City Mathematics Series,
pages 1–48. AMS/IAS/SIAM, 2018.
[58] Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin,
Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, et al.
Glam: Efficient scaling of language models with mixture-of-experts. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5547–5569. PMLR, 2022.
[59] Zidong Du, Robert Fasthuber, Tianshi Chen, Paolo Ienne, Ling Li, Tao Luo,
Xiaobing Feng, Yunji Chen, and Olivier Temam. Shidiannao: Shifting vision
processing closer to the sensor. In 2015 ACM/IEEE 42nd Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 92–104, 2015.
[60] Robert Eisele. The log-sum-exp trick in machine learning, 2016.
[61] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture
search: A survey. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017,
2019.
[62] Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Adrian Sampson, Luis Ceze, and Doug Burger. Neural
Acceleration for General-Purpose Approximate Programs. In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2012.
[63] Angela Fan, Edouard Grave, and Armand Joulin. Reducing transformer depth
on demand with structured dropout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11556, 2019.
[64] Hongxiang Fan, Thomas Chau, Stylianos I. Venieris, Royson Lee, Alexandros
Kouris, Wayne Luk, Nicholas D. Lane, and Mohamed S. Abdelfattah. Adaptable
butterfly accelerator for attention-based nns via hardware and algorithm co-
design, 2022.
[65] Chao Fang, Aojun Zhou, and Zhongfeng Wang. An algorithm-hardware co-
optimized framework for accelerating n:m sparse transformers. IEEE Transac-
tions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, pages 1–14, 2022.
[66] Eric Flamand, Davide Rossi, Francesco Conti, Igor Loi, Antonio Pullini, Florent
Rotenberg, and Luca Benini. Gap-8: A risc-v soc for ai at the edge of the
iot. In 2018 IEEE 29th International Conference on Application-specific Systems,
Architectures and Processors (ASAP), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2018.

In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (PLDI), 2008.
[22] Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Ka-
plan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
[23] Maxime Burchi and Valentin Vielzeuf. Efficient conformer: Progressive down-
sampling and grouped attention for automatic speech recognition. In 2021 IEEE
Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), pages 8–15.
IEEE, 2021.
[24] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. Efficientvit: Enhanced linear atten-
tion for high-resolution low-computation visual recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14756, 2022.
[25] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once-for-
all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deployment. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09791, 2019.
[26] Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. Proxylessnas: Direct neural architecture
search on target task and hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00332, 2018.
[27] Maurizio Capra, Beatrice Bussolino, Alberto Marchisio, Guido Masera, Maurizio
Martina, and Muhammad Shafique. Hardware and software optimizations for
accelerating deep neural networks: Survey of current trends, challenges, and
the road ahead. IEEE Access, 8:225134–225180, 2020.
[28] Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, Inigo Lopez-Gazpio, and Lucia Specia.
Semeval-2017 task 1: Semantic textual similarity-multilingual and cross-lingual
focused evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00055, 2017.
[29] Prasanth Chatarasi, Hyoukjun Kwon, Natesh Raina, Saurabh Malik, Vaisakh
Haridas, Angshuman Parashar, Michael Pellauer, Tushar Krishna, and Vivek
Sarkar. Marvel: A data-centric compiler for dnn operators on spatial accelerators,
2020.
[30] Boyu Chen, Peixia Li, Chuming Li, Baopu Li, Lei Bai, Chen Lin, Ming Sun, Junjie
Yan, and Wanli Ouyang. Glit: Neural architecture search for global and local
image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 12–21, 2021.
[31] Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Lau-
rent Sifre, and John Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with
speculative sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01318, 2023.
[32] Tianqi Chen, Mu Li, Yutian Li, Min Lin, Naiyan Wang, Minjie Wang, Tianjun
Xiao, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Zheng Zhang. Mxnet: A flexible and efficient
machine learning library for heterogeneous distributed systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.01274, 2015.
[33] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen
Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, et al. {TVM}: An
automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In 13th {USENIX}
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 18), pages
578–594, 2018.
[34] Tianshi Chen, Zidong Du, Ninghui Sun, Jia Wang, Chengyong Wu, Yunji Chen,
and Olivier Temam. Diannao: A small-footprint high-throughput accelerator for
ubiquitous machine-learning. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
ASPLOS ’14, pages 269–284, New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
[35] Y. Chen, J. Emer, and V. Sze. Eyeriss: A spatial architecture for energy-efficient
dataflow for convolutional neural networks. In 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 367–379, June
2016.
[36] Yinpeng Chen, Xiyang Dai, Dongdong Chen, Mengchen Liu, Xiaoyi Dong,
Lu Yuan, and Zicheng Liu. Mobile-former: Bridging mobilenet and transformer.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pages 5270–5279, 2022.
[37] Yu-Hsin Chen, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Eyeriss: A Spatial Architecture for
Energy-efficient Dataflow for Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2016.
[38] Yu-Hsin Chen, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Using dataflow to optimize energy
efficiency of deep neural network accelerators. IEEE Micro, 37(3):12–21, 2017.
[39] Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Eyeriss v2: A flexible
accelerator for emerging deep neural networks on mobile devices. IEEE Journal
on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 2019.
[40] Yunji Chen, Tao Luo, Shaoli Liu, Shijin Zhang, Liqiang He, Jia Wang, Ling Li,
Tianshi Chen, Zhiwei Xu, Ninghui Sun, and Olivier Temam. DaDianNao: A
Machine-learning Supercomputer. In Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2014.
[41] Sharan Chetlur, Cliff Woolley, Philippe Vandermersch, Jonathan Cohen, John
Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan Shelhamer. cudnn: Efficient primitives for
deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.0759, 2014.
[42] Jaewan Choi, Hailong Li, Byeongho Kim, Seunghwan Hwang, and Jung Ho Ahn.
Accelerating transformer networks through recomposing softmax layers. In
International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2021.
[43] Jack Choquette, Wishwesh Gandhi, Olivier Giroux, Nick Stam, and Ronny
Krashinsky. Nvidia a100 tensor core gpu: Performance and innovation. IEEE

[67] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding
sparse, trainable neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
[68] Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The state of sparsity in deep neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09574, 2019.
[69] Mingyu Gao, Jing Pu, Xuan Yang, Mark Horowitz, and Christos Kozyrakis. Tetris:
Scalable and Efficient Neural Network Acceleration with 3D Memory. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operation Systems (ASPLOS), 2017.
[70] Hasan Genc, Seah Kim, Alon Amid, Ameer Haj-Ali, Vighnesh Iyer, Pranav
Prakash, Jerry Zhao, Daniel Grubb, Harrison Liew, Howard Mao, Albert Ou,
Colin Schmidt, Samuel Steffl, John Wright, Ion Stoica, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley,
Krste Asanovic, Borivoje Nikolic, and Yakun Sophia Shao. Gemmini: Enabling
systematic deep-learning architecture evaluation via full-stack integration. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2021.
[71] Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, and
Kurt Keutzer. A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network
inference, 2021.
[72] Vinayak Gokhale, Jonghoon Jin, Aysegul Dundar, Berin Martini, and Eugenio
Culurciello. A 240 g-ops/s mobile coprocessor for deep neural networks. In
2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,
pages 696–701, 2014.
[73] Chengyue Gong, Dilin Wang, Meng Li, Xinlei Chen, Zhicheng Yan, Yuandong
Tian, Vikas Chandra, et al. Nasvit: Neural architecture search for efficient vision
transformers with gradient conflict aware supernet training. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[74] Saurabh Goyal, Anamitra Roy Choudhury, Saurabh Raje, Venkatesan Chakar-
avarthy, Yogish Sabharwal, and Ashish Verma. Power-bert: Accelerating bert
inference via progressive word-vector elimination. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 3690–3699. PMLR, 2020.
[75] Tobias Grosser, Hongbin Zheng, Raghesh Aloor, Andreas Simbürger, Armin
Größlinger, and Louis-Noël Pouchet. Polly-polyhedral optimization in llvm.
In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Polyhedral Compilation
Techniques (IMPACT), 2011.
[76] Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui
Yu, Wei Han, Shibo Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, et al. Conformer:
Convolution-augmented transformer for speech recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.08100, 2020.
[77] Zichao Guo, Xiangyu Zhang, Haoyuan Mu, Wen Heng, Zechun Liu, Yichen Wei,
and Jian Sun. Single path one-shot neural architecture search with uniform
sampling. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 544–560. Springer,
2020.
[78] Bastian Hagedorn, Johannes Lenfers, Thomas Kundefinedhler, Xueying Qin,
Sergei Gorlatch, and Michel Steuwer. Achieving high-performance the func-
tional way: A functional pearl on expressing high-performance optimizations
as rewrite strategies. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 4(ICFP), aug 2020.
[79] Tae Jun Ham, S. J. Jung, Seonghak Kim, Young H. Oh, Yeonhong Park, Yongchan
Song, Junghun Park, Sang-Hee Lee, K. Park, J. Lee, and Deog-Kyoon Jeong. A3:
Accelerating attention mechanisms in neural networks with approximation.
2020 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), pages 328–341, 2020.
[80] Tae Jun Ham, Yejin Lee, Seong Hoon Seo, Soosung Kim, Hyunji Choi, Sung Jun
Jung, and Jae W. Lee. Elsa: Hardware-software co-design for efficient, light-
weight self-attention mechanism in neural networks. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 692–
705, 2021.
[81] Song Han, Xingyu Liu, Huizi Mao, Jing Pu, Ardavan Pedram, Mark A. Horowitz,
and William J. Dally. Eie: Efficient inference engine on compressed deep neural
network. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, 44(3), June 2016.
[82] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[83] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 770–778, 2016.
[84] Kartik Hegde, Po-An Tsai, Sitao Huang, Vikas Chandra, Angshuman Parashar,
and Christopher W Fletcher. Mind mappings: enabling efficient algorithm-
accelerator mapping space search. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operation Systems
(ASPLOS), 2021.
[85] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (GELUs). arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
[86] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya,
Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes
Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Training compute-optimal large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
[87] Mark Horowitz. 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about
it). In 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical

Papers (ISSCC), pages 10–14, 2014.
[88] Lu Hou, Zhiqi Huang, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, and Qun Liu. Dyn-
abert: Dynamic bert with adaptive width and depth. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 33:9782–9793, 2020.
[89] Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun
Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets:
Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
[90] Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun
Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets:
Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications, 2017.
[91] J Hruska. New movidius myriad x vpu packs a custom neural compute engine,
2017.
[92] Qijing Huang, Minwoo Kang, Grace Dinh, Thomas Norell, Aravind Kalaiah,
James Demmel, John Wawrzynek, and Yakun Sophia Shao. Cosa: Scheduling by
constrained optimization for spatial accelerators. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 554–566. IEEE,
2021.
[93] Forrest N Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William J
Dally, and Kurt Keutzer. SqueezeNet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer
parameters and< 0.5 mb model size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360, 2016.
[94] Forrest N Iandola, Albert E Shaw, Ravi Krishna, and Kurt W Keutzer. Squeezebert:
What can computer vision teach nlp about efficient neural networks? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.11316, 2020.
[95] Yuka Ikarashi, Gilbert Louis Bernstein, Alex Reinking, Hasan Genc, and Jonathan
Ragan-Kelley. Exocompilation for productive programming of hardware accel-
erators. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2022, page 703–718,
New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery.
[96] Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Kornl Csernai. First quora dataset release:
Question pairs.(2017). URL quora. com/First-Quora-Dataset-Release-
Question-Pairs, 2017.
[97] Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, An-
drew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and
training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 2704–2713, 2018.
[98] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev, Jonathan Long,
Ross B. Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Darrell. Caffe: Convolutional
Architecture for Fast Feature Embedding. CoRR, abs/1408.5093, 2014.
[99] Zhihao Jia, Matei Zaharia, and Alex Aiken. Beyond data and model parallelism
for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems
(MLSys), 2019.
[100] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa, S. Bates,
S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, R. Boyle, P. Cantin, C. Chao, C. Clark, J. Coriell,
M. Daley, M. Dau, J. Dean, B. Gelb, T. V. Ghaemmaghami, R. Gottipati, W. Gul-
land, R. Hagmann, C. R. Ho, D. Hogberg, J. Hu, R. Hundt, D. Hurt, J. Ibarz,
A. Jaffey, A. Jaworski, A. Kaplan, H. Khaitan, D. Killebrew, A. Koch, N. Kumar,
S. Lacy, J. Laudon, J. Law, D. Le, C. Leary, Z. Liu, K. Lucke, A. Lundin, G. MacK-
ean, A. Maggiore, M. Mahony, K. Miller, R. Nagarajan, R. Narayanaswami, R. Ni,
K. Nix, T. Norrie, M. Omernick, N. Penukonda, A. Phelps, J. Ross, M. Ross,
A. Salek, E. Samadiani, C. Severn, G. Sizikov, M. Snelham, J. Souter, D. Stein-
berg, A. Swing, M. Tan, G. Thorson, B. Tian, H. Toma, E. Tuttle, V. Vasudevan,
R. Walter, W. Wang, E. Wilcox, and D. H. Yoon. In-datacenter performance
analysis of a tensor processing unit. In 2017 ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 1–12, June 2017.
[101] Sheng-Chun Kao, Geonhwa Jeong, and Tushar Krishna.
ConfuciuX: Au-
tonomous Hardware Resource Assignment for DNN Accelerators using Re-
inforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Mi-
croarchitecture (MICRO), 2020.
[102] Sheng-Chun Kao and Tushar Krishna. GAMMA: Automating the HW Mapping
of DNN Models on Accelerators via Genetic Algorithm. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2020.
[103] Sheng-Chun Kao, Angshuman Parashar, Po-An Tsai, and Tushar Krishna. De-
mystifying map space exploration for npus, 2022.
[104] Sheng-Chun Kao, Suvinay Subramanian, Gaurav Agrawal, and Tushar Krishna.
An optimized dataflow for mitigating attention performance bottlenecks. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operation Systems (ASPLOS), 2022.
[105] S. Karandikar, H. Mao, D. Kim, D. Biancolin, A. Amid, D. Lee, N. Pemberton,
E. Amaro, C. Schmidt, A. Chopra, Q. Huang, K. Kovacs, B. Nikolic, R. Katz,
J. Bachrach, and K. Asanovic. Firesim: Fpga-accelerated cycle-exact scale-out
system simulation in the public cloud. In 2018 ACM/IEEE 45th Annual Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 29–42, 2018.
[106] Sam Kaufman, Phitchaya Phothilimthana, Yanqi Zhou, Charith Mendis, Sudip
Roy, Amit Sabne, and Mike Burrows. A learned performance model for tensor
processing units. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys), 2021.

[107] Ben Keller, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Steve Dai, Stephen G. Tell, Brian Zimmer,
William J. Dally, C. Thomas Gray, and Brucek Khailany. A 17–95.6 tops/w
deep learning inference accelerator with per-vector scaled 4-bit quantization for
transformers in 5nm. In 2022 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology and Circuits
(VLSI Technology and Circuits), pages 16–17, 2022.
[108] Gyuwan Kim and Kyunghyun Cho. Length-adaptive transformer: Train once
with length drop, use anytime with search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07003,
2020.
[109] Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Albert Shaw, Nicholas Lee, Karttikeya Man-
galam, Jitendra Malik, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. Squeezeformer:
An efficient transformer for automatic speech recognition.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.00888, 2022.
[110] Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Nicholas Lee, Patrick Wang, Aniruddha
Nrusimha, Bohan Zhai, Tianren Gao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
Integer-only zero-shot quantization for efficient speech recognition. In ICASSP
2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 4288–4292. IEEE, 2022.
[111] Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
I-bert: Integer-only bert quantization. In International conference on machine
learning, pages 5506–5518. PMLR, 2021.
[112] Sehoon Kim, Karttikeya Mangalam, Jitendra Malik, Michael W Mahoney, Amir
Gholami, and Kurt Keutzer. Big little transformer decoder. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.07863, 2023.
[113] Sehoon Kim, Sheng Shen, David Thorsley, Amir Gholami, Woosuk Kwon, Joseph
Hassoun, and Kurt Keutzer. Learned token pruning for transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.00910, 2021.
[114] Fredrik Kjolstad, Shoaib Kamil, Stephen Chou, David Lugato, and Saman Ama-
rasinghe. The tensor algebra compiler. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications.
ACM New York, NY, USA, 2017.
[115] Simon Knowles. Graphcore. In IEEE Hot Chips Symposium, pages 1–25, 2021.
[116] Martin Kong, Richard Veras, Kevin Stock, Franz Franchetti, Louis-Noël Pouchet,
and Ponnuswamy Sadayappan. When polyhedral transformations meet simd
code generation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2013.
[117] Olga Kovaleva, Saurabh Kulshreshtha, Anna Rogers, and Anna Rumshisky.
Bert busters: Outlier dimensions that disrupt transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.06990, 2021.
[118] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun. ACM, 60(6), 2017.
[119] H. T. Kung, Bradley McDanel, and Sai Qian Zhang. Adaptive tiling: Applying
fixed-size systolic arrays to sparse convolutional neural networks. In 2018 24th
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pages 1006–1011, 2018.
[120] Eldar Kurtic, Daniel Campos, Tuan Nguyen, Elias Frantar, Mark Kurtz, Benjamin
Fineran, Michael Goin, and Dan Alistarh. The optimal bert surgeon: Scalable
and accurate second-order pruning for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07259, 2022.
[121] Andrey Kuzmin, Mart Van Baalen, Yuwei Ren, Markus Nagel, Jorn Peters, and
Tijmen Blankevoort. Fp8 quantization: The power of the exponent. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.09225, 2022.
[122] Hyoukjun Kwon, Prasanth Chatarasi, Vivek Sarkar, Tushar Krishna, Michael
Pellauer, and Angshuman Parashar. Maestro: A data-centric approach to under-
stand reuse, performance, and hardware cost of dnn mappings. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2020.
[123] Woosuk Kwon, Sehoon Kim, Michael W Mahoney, Joseph Hassoun, Kurt Keutzer,
and Amir Gholami. A fast post-training pruning framework for transformers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.09656, 2022.
[124] François Lagunas, Ella Charlaix, Victor Sanh, and Alexander M Rush. Block
pruning for faster transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04838, 2021.
[125] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush
Sharma, and Radu Soricut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of
language representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.
[126] Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. Llvm: A compilation framework for lifelong pro-
gram analysis & transformation. In International Symposium on Code Generation
and Optimization (CGO), 2004.
[127] Bingbing Li, Santosh Pandey, Haowen Fang, Yanjun Lyv, Ji Li, Jieyang Chen,
Mimi Xie, Lipeng Wan, Hang Liu, and Caiwen Ding. Ftrans: Energy-efficient
acceleration of transformers using fpga. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, ISLPED ’20, page
175–180, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[128] Mingzhen Li, Yi Liu, Xiaoyan Liu, Qingxiao Sun, Xin You, Hailong Yang,
Zhongzhi Luan, Lin Gan, Guangwen Yang, and Depei Qian. The deep learning
compiler: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, 32(3):708–727, 2021.
[129] Rui Li, Yufan Xu, Aravind Sukumaran-Rajam, Atanas Rountev, and P Sadayap-
pan. Analytical characterization and design space exploration for optimization
of cnns. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operation Systems (ASPLOS), 2021.

[130] Yanyu Li, Geng Yuan, Yang Wen, Eric Hu, Georgios Evangelidis, Sergey Tulyakov,
Yanzhi Wang, and Jian Ren. Efficientformer: Vision transformers at mobilenet
speed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01191, 2022.
[131] Zheng Li, Soroush Ghodrati, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, and
Mingu Kang. Accelerating attention through gradient-based learned runtime
pruning. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, ISCA ’22, page 902–915, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[132] Zhikai Li and Qingyi Gu. I-vit: Integer-only quantization for efficient vision
transformer inference, 2022.
[133] Zhuohan Li, Eric Wallace, Sheng Shen, Kevin Lin, Kurt Keutzer, Dan Klein, and
Joey Gonzalez. Train big, then compress: Rethinking model size for efficient
training and inference of transformers. In International Conference on machine
learning, pages 5958–5968. PMLR, 2020.
[134] Heng Liao, Jiajin Tu, Jing Xia, and Xiping Zhou. Davinci: A scalable architecture
for neural network computing. In IEEE Hot Chips Symposium, pages 1–44, 2019.
[135] Yi-Lun Liao, Sertac Karaman, and Vivienne Sze. Searching for efficient multi-
stage vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00642, 2021.
[136] Z. Liao, R. Couillet, and M. W. Mahoney. Sparse quantized spectral clustering.
Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:2010.01376, 2020.
[137] Sean Lie. Cerebras architecture deep dive: First look inside the hw/sw co-design
for deep learning: Cerebras systems. In IEEE Hot Chips Symposium, pages 1–34,
2022.
[138] Ji Lin, Wei-Ming Chen, Yujun Lin, Chuang Gan, Song Han, et al. Mcunet: Tiny
deep learning on iot devices. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:11711–11722, 2020.
[139] Chaoyue Liu, Libin Zhu, and Mikhail Belkin. Loss landscapes and optimization
in over-parameterized non-linear systems and neural networks. Applied and
Computational Harmonic Analysis, 59:85–116, 2022.
[140] Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li,
Li Fei-Fei, Alan Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural
architecture search. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
(ECCV), pages 19–34, 2018.
[141] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu. Hierarchical representations for efficient architecture search.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00436, 2017.
[142] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architec-
ture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055, 2018.
[143] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen,
Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A
robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692,
2019.
[144] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin,
and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 10012–10022, 2021.
[145] Zejian Liu, Fanrong Li, Gang Li, and Jian Cheng. Ebert: Efficient bert inference
with dynamic structured pruning. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 4814–4823, 2021.
[146] Liqiang Lu, Naiqing Guan, Yuyue Wang, Liancheng Jia, Zizhang Luo, Jieming
Yin, Jason Cong, and Yun Liang. Tenet: A framework for modeling tensor
dataflow based on relation-centric notation. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2021.
[147] Liqiang Lu, Yicheng Jin, Hangrui Bi, Zizhang Luo, Peng Li, Tao Wang, and
Yun Liang. Sanger: A co-design framework for enabling sparse attention using
reconfigurable architecture. In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO ’21, page 977–991, New York, NY, USA,
2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[148] Siyuan Lu, Meiqi Wang, Shuang Liang, Jun Lin, and Zhongfeng Wang. Hardware
Accelerator for Multi-Head Attention and Position-Wise Feed-Forward in the
Transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08605, 2020.
[149] Renqian Luo, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Enhong Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Neural archi-
tecture optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
2018.
[150] Dmitrii Marin, Jen-Hao Rick Chang, Anurag Ranjan, Anish Prabhu, Mohammad
Rastegari, and Oncel Tuzel. Token pooling in vision transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.03860, 2021.
[151] James McCaffrey. The max trick when computing softmax, 2016.
[152] Sachin Mehta and Mohammad Rastegari. Mobilevit: light-weight, general-
purpose, and mobile-friendly vision transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02178,
2021.
[153] Linyan Mei, Pouya Houshmand, Vikram Jain, Sebastian Giraldo, and Marian
Verhelst. Zigzag: Enlarging joint architecture-mapping design space exploration
for dnn accelerators. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 70(8), 2021.
[154] Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer
sentinel mixture models, 2016.
[155] Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better
than one? arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10650, 2019.

[156] Paulius Micikevicius, Dusan Stosic, Neil Burgess, Marius Cornea, Pradeep Dubey,
Richard Grisenthwaite, Sangwon Ha, Alexander Heinecke, Patrick Judd, John
Kamalu, et al. Fp8 formats for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05433,
2022.
[157] Maxim Milakov and Natalia Gimelshein. Online normalizer calculation for
softmax, 2018.
[158] Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Andrew Adams, Dillon Sharlet, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley,
and Kayvon Fatahalian. Automatically scheduling halide image processing
pipelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2016.
[159] Naveen Muralimanohar, Rajeev Balasubramonian, and Norman P Jouppi. Cacti
6.0: A tool to model large caches.
[160] Peter Nilsson, Ateeq Ur Rahman Shaik, Rakesh Gangarajaiah, and Erik Hertz.
Hardware implementation of the exponential function using taylor series. In
2014 NORCHIP, pages 1–4, 2014.
[161] NVIDIA. TensorRT: 2018.
[162] Auguste Olivry, Guillaume Iooss, Nicolas Tollenaere, Atanas Rountev, P Sa-
dayappan, and Fabrice Rastello. Ioopt: automatic derivation of i/o complexity
bounds for affine programs. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2021.
[163] Angshuman Parashar, Priyanka Raina, Yakun Sophia Shao, Yu-Hsin Chen,
Victor A Ying, Anurag Mukkara, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Brucek Khailany,
Stephen W Keckler, and Joel Emer. Timeloop: A systematic approach to dnn
accelerator evaluation. In 2019 IEEE international symposium on performance
analysis of systems and software (ISPASS), pages 304–315. IEEE, 2019.
[164] Angshuman Parashar, Minsoo Rhu, Anurag Mukkara, Antonio Puglielli, Rang-
harajan Venkatesan, Brucek Khailany, Joel Emer, Stephen W. Keckler, and
William J. Dally. Scnn: An accelerator for compressed-sparse convolutional
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture, ISCA ’17, page 27–40, New York, NY, USA, 2017.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[165] Eunjung Park, John Cavazos, Louis-Noël Pouchet, Cédric Bastoul, Albert Cohen,
and P Sadayappan. Predictive modeling in a polyhedral optimization space.
International journal of parallel programming, 2013.
[166] Junki Park, Hyunsung Yoon, Daehyun Ahn, Jungwook Choi, and Jae-Joon Kim.
Optimus: Optimized matrix multiplication structure for transformer neural net-
work accelerator. In I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos, and V. Sze, editors, Proceedings
of Machine Learning and Systems, volume 2, pages 363–378. 2020.
[167] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gre-
gory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga,
et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[168] Suchita Pati, Shaizeen Aga, Nuwan Jayasena, and Matthew D Sinclair. Demysti-
fying bert: Implications for accelerator design. In International Symposium on
Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2021.
[169] Jing Pei, Lei Deng, Sen Song, Mingguo Zhao, Youhui Zhang, Shuang Wu, Guan-
rui Wang, Zhe Zou, Zhenzhi Wu, Wei He, et al. Towards artificial general
intelligence with hybrid tianjic chip architecture. Nature, 572(7767):106–111,
2019.
[170] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient
neural architecture search via parameters sharing. In International conference
on machine learning, pages 4095–4104. PMLR, 2018.
[171] Raghu Prabhakar and Sumti Jairath. Sambanova sn10 rdu: Accelerating software
2.0 with dataflow. In IEEE Hot Chips Symposium, pages 1–37, 2021.
[172] Zheng Qu, Liu Liu, Fengbin Tu, Zhaodong Chen, Yufei Ding, and Yuan Xie.
Dota: Detect and omit weak attentions for scalable transformer acceleration. In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’22, page 14–26,
New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery.
[173] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving
language understanding by generative pre-training, 2018.
[174] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog,
1(8):9, 2019.
[175] Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann,
Francis Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young,
et al. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training
gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
[176] Jack W Rae, Anna Potapenko, Siddhant M Jayakumar, and Timothy P Lillicrap.
Compressive transformers for long-range sequence modelling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.05507, 2019.
[177] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
[178] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of
transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
21(140):1–67, 2020.

[179] Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Fredo
Durand, and Saman Amarasinghe. Halide: a language and compiler for optimiz-
ing parallelism, locality, and recomputation in image processing pipelines. Acm
Sigplan Notices, 2013.
[180] Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Frédo
Durand, and Saman Amarasinghe. Halide: A language and compiler for optimiz-
ing parallelism, locality, and recomputation in image processing pipelines. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (PLDI), 2013.
[181] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD:
100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
[182] Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized
evolution for image classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the aaai
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pages 4780–4789, 2019.
[183] Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Xiaojiang
Chen, and Xin Wang. A comprehensive survey of neural architecture search:
Challenges and solutions. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(4):1–34, 2021.
[184] Nadav Rotem, Jordan Fix, Saleem Abdulrasool, Garret Catron, Summer Deng,
Roman Dzhabarov, Nick Gibson, James Hegeman, Meghan Lele, Roman Lev-
enstein, et al. Glow: Graph lowering compiler techniques for neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00907, 2018.
[185] Amit Sabne. Xla: Compiling machine learning for peak performance. 2020.
[186] Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and Preslav Nakov. Poor man’s bert:
Smaller and faster transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03844, 2020.
[187] Ananda Samajdar, Jan Moritz Joseph, Yuhao Zhu, Paul Whatmough, Matthew
Mattina, and Tushar Krishna. A systematic methodology for characterizing
scalability of dnn accelerators using scale-sim. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS), 2020.
[188] Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-
Chieh Chen. MobilenetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
4510–4520, 2018.
[189] Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander Rush. Movement pruning: Adaptive
sparsity by fine-tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:20378–20389, 2020.
[190] Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ilić, Daniel
Hesslow, Roman Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias
Gallé, et al. Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100, 2022.
[191] Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Q
Tran, Yi Tay, and Donald Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.07061, 2022.
[192] Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay.
Consis-
tent accelerated inference via confident adaptive transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.08803, 2021.
[193] Lukas Sekanina. Neural architecture search and hardware accelerator co-search:
A survey. IEEE Access, 9:151337–151362, 2021.
[194] Guan Shen, Jieru Zhao, Quan Chen, Jingwen Leng, Chao Li, and Minyi Guo. Salo:
An efficient spatial accelerator enabling hybrid sparse attention mechanisms
for long sequences. In Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference, DAC ’22, page 571–576, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[195] Sheng Shen, Zhen Dong, Jiayu Ye, Linjian Ma, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami,
Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. Q-BERT: Hessian based ultra low
precision quantization of bert. In AAAI, pages 8815–8821, 2020.
[196] Frans Sijstermans. The NVIDIA Deep Learning Accelerator. In Hot Chips, 2018.
[197] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-scale Image Recognition. CoRR, abs/1408.1556, 2014.
[198] Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Ra-
jbhandari, Jared Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay
Korthikanti, et al. Using deepspeed and megatron to train megatron-turing nlg
530b, a large-scale generative language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990,
2022.
[199] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimiza-
tion of machine learning algorithms. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 25, 2012.
[200] David So, Quoc Le, and Chen Liang. The evolved transformer. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5877–5886. PMLR, 2019.
[201] David So, Wojciech Mańke, Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, Noam Shazeer, and Quoc V
Le. Searching for efficient transformers for language modeling. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6010–6022, 2021.
[202] Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning,
Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic
compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 1631–1642, 2013.
[203] Jacob R. Stevens, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Steve Dai, Brucek Khailany, and
Anand Raghunathan. Softermax: Hardware/software co-design of an efficient

IEEE, 2021.
[224] Kuan Wang, Zhijian Liu, Yujun Lin, Ji Lin, and Song Han. HAQ: Hardware-
aware automated quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2019.
[225] Meiqi Wang, Siyuan Lu, Danyang Zhu, Jun Lin, and Zhongfeng Wang. A high-
speed and low-complexity architecture for softmax function in deep learning.
In 2018 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems (APCCAS), pages
223–226, 2018.
[226] Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage
challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05426, 2017.
[227] Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David Patterson. Roofline: an insight-
ful visual performance model for multicore architectures. Communications of
the ACM, 52(4):65–76, 2009.
[228] Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang, Fei Sun, Yiming Wu,
Yuandong Tian, Peter Vajda, Yangqing Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. Fbnet: Hardware-
aware efficient convnet design via differentiable neural architecture search. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 10734–10742, 2019.
[229] Bichen Wu, Yanghan Wang, Peizhao Zhang, Yuandong Tian, Peter Vajda, and
Kurt Keutzer. Mixed precision quantization of convnets via differentiable neural
architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00090, 2018.
[230] Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Autoformer: Decom-
position transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:22419–22430, 2021.
[231] Yannan Nellie Wu, Joel S Emer, and Vivienne Sze. Accelergy: An architecture-
level energy estimation methodology for accelerator designs. In 2019 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), pages 1–8. IEEE,
2019.
[232] Zhanghao Wu, Zhijian Liu, Ji Lin, Yujun Lin, and Song Han. Lite transformer
with long-short range attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11886, 2020.
[233] Mengzhou Xia, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. Structured pruning learns
compact and accurate models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00408, 2022.
[234] Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Jaejun Lee, Yaoliang Yu, and Jimmy Lin. Deebert: Dynamic
early exiting for accelerating bert inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12993,
2020.
[235] Jin Xu, Xu Tan, Renqian Luo, Kaitao Song, Jian Li, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. Nas-
bert: task-agnostic and adaptive-size bert compression with neural architecture
search. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, pages 1933–1943, 2021.
[236] Longxing Yang, Yu Hu, Shun Lu, Zihao Sun, Jilin Mei, Yinhe Han, and Xiaowei
Li. Searching for burgerformer with micro-meso-macro space design. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pages 25055–25069. PMLR, 2022.
[237] Tao Yang, Hui Ma, Xiaoling Li, Fangxin Liu, Yilong Zhao, Zhezhi He, and Li Jiang.
Dtatrans: Leveraging dynamic token-based quantization with accuracy com-
pensation mechanism for efficient transformer architecture. IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, pages 1–1, 2022.
[238] Tien-Ju Yang, Andrew Howard, Bo Chen, Xiao Zhang, Alec Go, Mark Sandler,
Vivienne Sze, and Hartwig Adam. Netadapt: Platform-aware neural network
adaptation for mobile applications. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 285–300, 2018.
[239] Xuan Yang, Mingyu Gao, Qiaoyi Liu, Jeff Setter, Jing Pu, Ankita Nayak, Steven
Bell, Kaidi Cao, Heonjae Ha, Priyanka Raina, et al. Interstellar: Using halide’s
scheduling language to analyze dnn accelerators. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-
guages and Operating Systems, pages 369–383, 2020.
[240] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov,
and Quoc V Le. XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
5753–5763, 2019.
[241] Zhewei Yao, Zhen Dong, Zhangcheng Zheng, Amir Gholami, Jiali Yu, Eric Tan,
Leyuan Wang, Qijing Huang, Yida Wang, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
HAWQV3: Dyadic neural network quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10680,
2020.
[242] Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W. Mahoney. PyHessian:
Neural networks through the lens of the Hessian. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07145,
2019.
[243] Jiahui Yu, Pengchong Jin, Hanxiao Liu, Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans,
Mingxing Tan, Thomas Huang, Xiaodan Song, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc Le.
Bignas: Scaling up neural architecture search with big single-stage models. In
European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 702–717. Springer, 2020.
[244] Joonsang Yu, Junki Park, Seongmin Park, Minsoo Kim, Sihwa Lee, Dong Hyun
Lee, and Jungwook Choi. Nn-lut: Neural approximation of non-linear operations
for efficient transformer inference. In Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design
Automation Conference, DAC ’22, page 577–582, New York, NY, USA, 2022.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[245] Shixing Yu, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Zhen Dong, Sehoon Kim, Michael W
Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. Hessian-aware pruning and optimal neural implant.

softmax for transformers. In 2021 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference
(DAC), pages 469–474, 2021.
[204] Yang Sun, Wei Hu, Fang Liu, Min Jiang, FeiHu Huang, and Dian Xu. Speformer:
An efficient hardware-software cooperative solution for sparse spectral trans-
former. In 2022 IEEE 9th International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud
Computing (CSCloud)/2022 IEEE 8th International Conference on Edge Computing
and Scalable Cloud (EdgeCom), pages 180–185, 2022.
[205] Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu, Yiming Yang, and Denny
Zhou. Mobilebert: a compact task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02984, 2020.
[206] Vivienne Sze, Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, and Joel Emer. Efficient processing
of deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey, 2017.
[207] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir
Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going
deeper with convolutions. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 1–9, 2015.
[208] Emil Talpes, Debjit Das Sarma, Ganesh Venkataramanan, Peter Bannon, Bill
McGee, Benjamin Floering, Ankit Jalote, Christopher Hsiong, Sahil Arora,
Atchyuth Gorti, et al. Compute solution for tesla’s full self-driving computer.
IEEE Micro, 40(2):25–35, 2020.
[209] Thierry Tambe, Coleman Hooper, Lillian Pentecost, Tianyu Jia, En-Yu Yang,
Marco Donato, Victor Sanh, Paul Whatmough, Alexander M. Rush, David Brooks,
and Gu-Yeon Wei. EdgeBERT: Sentence-Level Energy Optimizations for Latency-
Aware Multi-Task NLP Inference. page 830–844, 2021.
[210] Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew
Howard, and Quoc V Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search
for mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 2820–2828, 2019.
[211] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convo-
lutional neural networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 6105–6114. PMLR,
09–15 Jun 2019.
[212] James W Thomas, John P Okada, Peter Markstein, and Ren-Chang Li. The
libm library and floatingpoint arithmetic in hp-ux for itanium-based systems.
Technical report, Technical report, Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, CA,
USA, 2004.
[213] Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kul-
shreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al.
Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239,
2022.
[214] Philippe Tillet, HT Kung, and David Cox. Triton: an intermediate language
and compiler for tiled neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming
Languages, 2019.
[215] Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre
Sablayrolles, and Hervé Jégou. Training data-efficient image transformers &
distillation through attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.
[216] Nicolas Vasilache, Oleksandr Zinenko, Theodoros Theodoridis, Priya Goyal,
Zachary DeVito, William S. Moses, Sven Verdoolaege, Andrew Adams, and
Albert Cohen. Tensor comprehensions: Framework-agnostic high-performance
machine learning abstractions, 2018.
[217] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.
In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
[218] Rangharajan Venkatesan, Yakun Sophia Shao, Miaorong Wang, Jason Clemons,
Steve Dai, Matthew Fojtik, Ben Keller, Alicia Klinefelter, Nathaniel Pinckney,
Priyanka Raina, et al. Magnet: A modular accelerator generator for neural
networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided
Design (ICCAD), 2019.
[219] Alvin Wan, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Zijian He, Yuandong Tian, Saining
Xie, Bichen Wu, Matthew Yu, Tao Xu, Kan Chen, et al. Fbnetv2: Differentiable
neural architecture search for spatial and channel dimensions. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
12965–12974, 2020.
[220] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and
Samuel R Bowman. GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07461, 2018.
[221] Dilin Wang, Chengyue Gong, Meng Li, Qiang Liu, and Vikas Chandra. Al-
phanet: improved training of supernets with alpha-divergence. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10760–10771. PMLR, 2021.
[222] Hanrui Wang, Zhanghao Wu, Zhijian Liu, Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, Chuang Gan,
and Song Han. Hat: Hardware-aware transformers for efficient natural language
processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14187, 2020.
[223] Hanrui Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Spatten: Efficient sparse attention
architecture with cascade token and head pruning. In 2021 IEEE International
Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 97–110.

In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision, pages 3880–3891, 2022.
[246] Ali Hadi Zadeh and A. Moshovos. Gobo: Quantizing attention-based nlp models
for low latency and energy efficient inference. In 53rd IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2020.
[247] Dan Zhang, Safeen Huda, Ebrahim Songhori, Kartik Prabhu, Quoc Le, Anna
Goldie, and Azalia Mirhoseini. A full-stack search technique for domain opti-
mized deep learning accelerators. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, pages 27–42, 2022.
[248] Shijin Zhang, Zidong Du, Lei Zhang, Huiying Lan, Shaoli Liu, Ling Li, Qi Guo,
Tianshi Chen, and Yunji Chen. Cambricon-x: An accelerator for sparse neural
networks. In 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microar-
chitecture (MICRO), pages 1–12, 2016.
[249] Lianmin Zheng, Chengfan Jia, Minmin Sun, Zhao Wu, Cody Hao Yu, Ameer
Haj-Ali, Yida Wang, Jun Yang, Danyang Zhuo, Koushik Sen, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
and Ion Stoica. Ansor: Generating High-Performance Tensor Programs for Deep
Learning. Technical report, arXiv. arXiv:2006.06762 [cs, stat] type: article.
[250] Zhao Zhong, Junjie Yan, Wei Wu, Jing Shao, and Cheng-Lin Liu. Practical
block-wise neural network architecture generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2423–2432, 2018.
[251] Xuda Zhou, Zidong Du, Qi Guo, Shaoli Liu, Chengsi Liu, Chao Wang, Xuehai
Zhou, Ling Li, Tianshi Chen, and Yunji Chen. Cambricon-s: Addressing irreg-
ularity in sparse neural networks through a cooperative software/hardware
approach. In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microar-
chitecture (MICRO), pages 15–28, 2018.
[252] Yanqi Zhou, Sudip Roy, Amirali Abdolrashidi, Daniel Wong, Peter Ma, Qiumin
Xu, Hanxiao Liu, Phitchaya Phothilimtha, Shen Wang, Anna Goldie, et al. Trans-
ferable graph optimizers for ml compilers. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
[253] Zhe Zhou, Junlin Liu, Zhenyu Gu, and Guangyu Sun. Energon: Towards efficient
acceleration of transformers using dynamic sparse attention. IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, pages 1–1, 2022.
[254] Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01578, 2016.
[255] Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Learning
transferable architectures for scalable image recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 8697–8710,
2018.

A
APPENDIX
A.1
Decoder Model Architecture

Fig. 27 illustrates the computations performed in the MHA and FFN modules of the Transformer decoder. Compared to the Transformer
encoder, the main differences are (1) that the majority of the matmuls are matrix-vector operations and (2) that the keys and values from the
previous token generation iterations are cached.

WQ

𝑑x 𝑑

𝑑/ℎx 1

Cached Key,
Value Tokens

𝑑x 1

𝑙x 𝑑/ℎ

𝑙x 𝑑/ℎ

WK

Previous 𝑙-1

Key Tokens

𝑑x 𝑑

Transpose

Concatenate

𝑑/ℎx 1

Decoder

(𝑙-1 x d)

𝑑x 1
𝑙x 1

Input

𝑑x 1

Softmax

WV

Previous 𝑙-1
Value Tokens

𝑙x 1

𝑑x 𝑑

𝑑/ℎx 𝑙

𝑑/ℎx 1

(𝑙-1 x d)

Concatenate

𝑑/ℎx 1

𝑑x 1

Split Across h
Attention Heads

Split Across h
Attention Heads

Concatenate

WOut

Norm + Add

𝑑x 𝑑

LayerNorm
Attention

Output

𝑑x 𝑙

𝑑x 1
𝑑x 1

Muti-Head Attention (MHA) Module

W1

W2
Norm + Add
𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 𝑑
𝑑x 𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁
𝑑x 1

𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 1

Encoder

Output
Attention

LayerNorm
GELU

Output

𝑑𝐹𝐹𝑁x 1
𝑑x 1
𝑑x 1

Feed-Forward Network (FFN) Module

Figure 27: Map of the computations performed in the Transformer decoder. The decoder is primarily composed of matrix-vector operations. The
diagram displays the computation for one decoder block and for the 𝑙th iteration.

A.2
High-Level Overview of CNN Architecture

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a class of neural networks which were popularized by the release of AlexNet in 2012 and have
seen widespread use across computer vision applications [90, 118, 197, 207, 211]. These networks leverage convolutions, which are operations
that apply a set of weights (also referred to as a filter or kernel) to groups of elements in the input. The CNN model used for baseline
comparisons in this paper is ResNet-50, which is a popular architecture for vision applications [83]. The ResNet-50 model architecture is
outlined in Fig. 28.

Size: 112
Size: 56
Size: 28
Size: 14
Size: 7

FC
Layer
Conv1

Block 0
Block 1
Block 1
Block 2
Block 2
Block 3

Block 3

X 5
X 2

X 3
X 3

Kernel Size, # Output Channels

Conv1
Block 0
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3

7x7, 64 / 2
1x1, 64
1x1, 128 *
1x1, 256 *
1x1, 512 *

3x3, 64
3x3, 128
3x3, 256
3x3, 512

1x1, 256
1x1, 512
1x1, 1024
1x1, 2048

Figure 28: Diagram of the ResNet-50 model architecture. The operations with a star beside them have a stride of 2 for the first block of that type.
The arrows correspond to residual additions. The dotted arrows correspond to additional 1×1 convolutional layers that project the previous input
to match the dimension of the output of the block. ReLU, BatchNorm, and Softmax layers are omitted for simplicity.

(a) Convolution

(b) Average Pooling

(c) Max Pooling

Kernel selects maximum value
Kernel averages values

Kernel slides over the input

1 ∗1 −1 ∗2 −1 ∗3 + 1 ∗4 = 0

1
2

1
2

1
2

0
1
-1

2.5
1/4
1/4

4

3
4

3
4

3
4

-1
1

1/4
1/4

Kernel
Input

Output Channel

Kernel
Input
Output Channel

Input
Output Channel

Figure 29: Diagrams outlining the Convolution, Average Pooling, and Max Pooling operations.

The basic convolution operation is outlined in Fig. 29, assuming two-dimensional inputs. In 2D, the convolution can be viewed as applying
a sliding kernel across the input matrix in order to produce the output matrix. When multiple kernels are applied to the image, each kernel
produces a separate output channel. The spacing between successive filter applications is termed the stride; for example, a stride of 2 means
that the kernel is only applied to every second set of input pixels.
CNNs also contain several other operations, such as ReLU, Batch Normalization, and Pooling. ReLU is a nonlinear activation function that
can be expressed as 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈(𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0,𝑥). Batch Normalization (or BatchNorm) is also used in CNNs instead of LayerNorm. BatchNorm is
outlined graphically in Fig. 2. As opposed to LayerNorm, BatchNorm normalizes the data per channel in the input tensor and uses statistics
computed at training time. This means that the BatchNorm operation can be fused with a prior convolution without impacting the requisite
tiling dimensions; in fact, BatchNorm layers can be folded with convolutions to also eliminate the added FLOPs from these layers.
CNNs also contain pooling layers for downsampling. Pooling layers are similar to CNNs in that they apply a filter element-wise to the
input. However, these pooling filters use fixed patterns, such as using a filter made up of equal values in the case of Average Pooling, or
selecting the maximum element in the group in the case of Max Pooling. These pooling operations are outlined graphically in Fig. 29. Note
that some networks use strided convolutions for downsampling instead of incorporating pooling layers [83]. Finally, CNNs also often use
one or more fully connected layers followed by the Softmax function for the output classifier [83, 90, 118, 197, 207, 211].

A.3
Additional Profiling Results

Tab. 10 provides per-layer breakdowns of the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for a hypothetical BERT model with only 4 attention
heads for sequence lengths of 128, 512, and 4096. Tab. 11 provides per-layer breakdowns of the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for
GPT-2 for sequence lengths of 128, 512, and 4096.

Table 10: Per-Layer FLOPs, memory operations (MOPs), and arithmetic intensity for the hypothetical BERT-Base encoder with 4 attention heads
and with sequence lengths of 128, 512, and 4096 tokens. The number of FLOPs consumed by each operation for each sequence length is similar to
the BERT-Base encoder with 12 attention heads (Tab. 3). However, the number of MOPs consumed by the activation-to-activation matmuls are
significantly lower for each sequence length relative to the BERT-Base encoder with 12 attention heads. This leads to greater arithmetic intensity
in the activation-to-activation matmuls and for end-to-end inference when using 4 attention heads rather than 12 attention heads.

Sequence Length
Operator
FLOPs (× 109)
% of total FLOPs
MOPs (× 109)
% of total MOPs
Arithmetic Intensity

MHA (projections)
7.25
0.32
0.04
0.28
192.00
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
0.60
0.03
0.01
0.047
95.69
FFN (projections)
14.47
0.65
0.07
0.51
211.86
Other
0.07
0.003
0.02
0.16
3.30
Total
22.42
1
0.13
1
167.14

128

MHA (projections)
28.99
0.30
0.07
0.21
438.86
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
9.65
0.10
0.04
0.14
219.04
FFN (projections)
57.98
0.60
0.10
0.32
558.54
Other
0.32
0.003
0.10
0.33
3.07
Total
96.94
1
0.32
1
303.59

512

MHA (projections)
231.93
0.18
0.33
0.07
702.17
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
617.63
0.47
1.76
0.37
350.61
FFN (projections)
463.86
0.35
0.43
0.09
1068.52
Other
5.41
0.004
2.25
0.47
2.40
Total
1318.83
1
4.78
1
276.00

4096

Table 11: Per-Layer FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for the GPT-2 decoder with sequence lengths of 128, 512, and 4096 tokens. The number
of FLOPs is similar to the BERT-Base encoder (provided in Tab. 3). However, the number of MOPs is much larger than in the BERT-Base encoder.
This results in lower arithmetic intensity in the GPT-2 decoder than the BERT-Base encoder.

Sequence Length
Operator
FLOPs (× 109)
% of total FLOPs
MOPs (× 109)
% of total MOPs
Arithmetic Intensity

MHA (projections)
7.25
33
3.63
33
2.00
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
30
0.01
0.16
1
1.92
FFN (projections)
14.50
66
7.26
66
2.00
Other
0.07
0.3
0.03
0.3
2.58
Total
22.12
100
11.08
100
2.0

128

MHA (projections)
28.99
32
14.53
32
2.00
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
4.83
5
2.45
5
2.00
FFN (projections)
57.98
63
29.04
63
2.00
Other
0.35
0.4
0.14
0.3
2.47
Total
92.15
100
46.17
100
2.00

512

MHA (projections)
231.93
23
116.27
23
2.00
MHA (act-to-act matmuls)
309.24
31
155.98
31
1.98
FFN (projections)
463.86
46
232.31
46
2.0
Other
7.02
0.7
3.25
0.6
2.16
Total
1012.04
100
507.80
100
1.99

4096

A.4
Additional ResNet-50 Workload Analysis

Tab. 12 provides detailed analysis of the FLOPs, MOPs, and arithmetic intensity for several convolutional layers in ResNet-50.

Table 12: FLOPs, memory operations (MOPs), and arithmetic intensity for different convolutional layers in ResNet-50.

Kernel Size
Output Channels
Output Size
FLOPs (× 109)
MOPs (× 109)
Arithmetic Intensity

1×1
64
56×56
0.31
0.0031
100.76
3×3
64
56×56
0.69
0.0013
527.55
1×1
256
56×56
0.31
0.0031
100.76
1×1
128
28×28
0.31
0.0017
181.14
3×3
128
28×28
0.92
0.0014
664.09
1×1
512
28×28
0.41
0.0023
181.14
1×1
256
14×14
0.51
0.0026
200.30
3×3
256
14×14
1.39
0.0041
335.00
1×1
1024
14×14
0.62
0.0031
200.30
1×1
512
7×7
0.21
0.0023
87.53
3×3
512
7×7
0.69
0.0072
95.96
1×1
2048
7×7
0.31
0.0035
87.53

A.5
Additional Analytical Modeling Results

Latency Breakdown and End-to-end Runtime. We modeled the performance breakdown of the BERT-Base and BERT-Large encoders,
under the assumption of square tiling for all matrix operations, and no operation fusion (i.e., each operation required inputs to be read
from external memory and outputs to be flushed out). We also modeled the performance breakdown of the GPT-2 decoder under the
same assumption of no operation fusion. The latency breakdowns for BERT-Base and GPT-2 for different sequence lengths are provided in
Fig. 30 and 31, respectively. Fig. 32 shows the runtime latency of BERT-Base, BERT-Large, and GPT-2, normalized to the runtime latency
of BERT-Base with a sequence length of 128. The runtime scaling and breakdowns from the analytical model were similar to the trends
observed when profiling inference on the CPU in Section 2.2.2. However, for a fixed sequence length, the MHA computation takes up a
greater proportion of the computation on the CPU. Note that the analytical model was designed assuming a hardware architecture that
was different from the CPU architecture, and the relative breakdown between different operations would not necessarily be the same for
different hardware platforms.

Comparison with ResNet-50. We also modeled ResNet-50 to provide a baseline for our analysis. We first compared the runtime between
BERT-Base and ResNet-50 without operation fusing. We found that the runtime of ResNet-50 was 1.28 times faster than the runtime of
BERT-Base with a sequence length of 128. As outlined in Section 2.2.1, ResNet-50 contains 3.07 times fewer FLOPs and 1.28 times fewer

BERT-Base Latency Breakdown (Analytic Model)

100

Percentage of Latency (%)

75

50

25

0

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

MHA (act-to-act)
MHA (proj.)
FFN (proj.)
Other

Figure 30: Plot of the computation breakdown in the BERT-Base encoder versus sequence length using our analytical model. Proj. and act-to-act
refer to the projection operation (i.e., activation-to-weight matmul) and the activation-to-activation matmul, respectively. Other refers to the
non-matmul operations.

GPT-2 Latency Breakdown (Analytic Model)

100

Percentage of Latency (%)

75

50

25

0

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

MHA (act-to-act)
MHA (proj.)
FFN (proj.)
Other

Figure 31: Plot of the computation breakdown in the GPT-2 decoder versus sequence length using our analytical model. Proj. and act-to-act
refer to the projection operation (i.e., activation-to-weight matmul) and the activation-to-activation matmul, respectively. Other refers to the
non-matmul operations.

Normalized Latency of Transformer Models (Analytic Model)

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
GPT-2

840

750

Normalized Latency

500

352

229

250

159

82

80

75

18
37

3
7
14
33

1
2
5
11
28

128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Sequence Length

Figure 32: Plot of the runtime latency of the BERT-Base and BERT-Large encoders and the GPT-2 decoder versus sequence length using our
analytical model, normalized to the runtime of BERT-Base with a sequence length of 128.

MOPs than BERT-Base with a sequence length of 128. This shows how differences in FLOPs between two DNN models don’t necessarily
represent the relationship between the runtime latency of these two models.
Additionally, we observe that, without operation fusion, nonlinear operations consume 32.4% of overall runtime latency, even though
convolutions consume 99.3% of FLOPs, as outlined in Tab. 4. We therefore assessed the latency of fusing the nonlinear operations with the
prior convolutional layers. We found that a 1.32 times speedup can be obtained by fusing BatchNorm and ReLU with the prior convolutional
layers, demonstrating how in the case of ResNet-50, the latencies from the nonlinear operations can be significantly reduced by fusing.
However, in Sec. 5.5.2, we demonstrate how operation fusion can be non-trivial for the Transformer architecture. For Transformers, fusing
LayerNorm or Softmax with the prior matmuls may require changes in tiling dimension changes which can actually increase runtime latency.

A.6
Acronyms and Abbreviations

Tab. 13 summarizes several acronyms/abbreviations used throughout this papers and their full names.

Table 13: Full names of the acronyms and abbreviations used in this paper.

Abbreviation
Full name

act-to-act
activation-to-activation
ALU
arithmetic logic unit
attn.
attention
CDF
cumulative distribution function
CNN
convolutional neural network
CV
computer vision
DNN
deep neural network
EDP
energy-delay product
FFN
feed-forward network
FLOPs
floating-point operations
MAC
multiply-accumulate
matmul
matrix multiplication
MHA
multi-head attention
MOPs
memory operations
NAS
neural architecture search
NLP
natural language processing
PE
processing element
RF
register file
RL
reinforcement learning
RTL
register transfer logic