Large Language Models in Ambulatory Devices
for Home Health Diagnostics: A case study of
Sickle Cell Anemia Management

arXiv:2305.03715v1 [cs.CL] 5 May 2023

1,2Oluwatosin Ogundare, 3Subuola Sofolahan

1Siemens Technology
2California State University, San Bernardino
3Oklahoma State University, Stillwater
May 8, 2023

Abstract

This study investigates the potential of an ambulatory device that
incorporates Large Language Models (LLMs) in cadence with other spe-
cialized ML models to assess anemia severity in sickle cell patients in real
time.
The device would rely on sensor data that measures angiogenic
material levels to assess anemia severity, providing real-time information
to patients and clinicians to reduce the frequency of vaso-occlusive crises
because of the early detection of anemia severity, allowing for timely inter-
ventions and potentially reducing the likelihood of serious complications.
The main challenges in developing such a device are the creation of a reli-
able non-invasive tool for angiogenic level assessment, a biophysics model
and the practical consideration of an LLM communicating with emer-
gency personnel on behalf of an incapacitated patient. A possible system
is proposed, and the limitations of this approach are discussed.

1
Introduction

Every now and again, one might suﬀer from insomnia, anemia and other symp-
toms for a variety of reasons. In sickle patients, it might be part of a vaso-
occlusive episode. In many cases, the timing of these episodes punctuates the
experience especially for acute suﬀerers. When there is more awareness of the
symptoms and what they indicate, a regimen that ameliorates the condition
might be easily developed.
However, in many developing countries, the liv-
ing conditions complicates mainstream notions of healthcare regimen and more
decisive measures to deliver information are needed. Advancement in nanotech-
nology and solid state physics have driven the boom in wearable technology
or the so-called ambulatory devices.
What remains a deterrent for many is
that the interpretation of the data that is harvested by the integrated micro

1

and nano sensors are not easily accessible to the layman or intuitive. Many
potential customers ﬁnd a display dominated by numbers without any partic-
ular personalized interpretation tedious. In the last decade, ﬁtness and health
engineers have begun to incorporate sleep quality assessment into commercial
ambulatory devices and in some cases provide information on the onset of a fu-
ture sleep episode [4][5][6] but no real advancement has been made in wearable
technology to arrest sudden emergent vaso-occlusive crises in sickle cell patients
especially young children in impoverished West African countries. Emergent
vaso-occlusive crises often lead to fatalities and is responsible for up to 16% of
mortality in children under the age of 5 years in West African countries espe-
cially Nigeria with the documented largest sickle cell gene pool in the world [1].
Fahlenkamp & Sofolahan model work on developing a 3D angiogenesis model
for biosensing works well in tandem with the prevailing theory that angiogen-
esis mechanisms are more easily engendered in children with sickle cell anemia
as they tend to have elevated angiogenic progenitors [9] [2] [3]. The ideas in
this study are based on the assumption that more angiogenetic activity could
impact the echo reﬂections from acoustic pulses transmitted and received by
a nano-engineered acoustic omni-directional transducer and a deep neural net-
work can perform parameter inversion within a reasonable degree of certainty.
A discussion of the foundational theory behind our methodology is presented
with respect to how Large Language Models (LLMs) improve the state of the
art in health monitoring in cadence with other novel applications of LLMs in
engineering [7].

2
Large Language Models and Sickle Cell Man-
agement

We introduce a simple model of the artery without bifurcation as shown in
ﬁgure 1, within an anatomical region that an extra-corporeal health monitoring
device is attached. The length of the referenced anatomical region containing
the non-bifurcated artery is dx. The arterial walls deform in response to the
pressure gradient in the arterial blood vessel such that there is a continuous
variation in the arterial radius, r(x, t).
The cross-sectional area, D, can be
computed in terms of the arterial radius as D(x, t) = π(r(x, t))2. In a practical
computational sense, the length of the reference artery, dx, and reference time,
t, are discretized and spanned by

i, j ∈Z : i, j = {1, 2, 3, . . .}

such that
Di = π(r(i, j))2

The continuity equation for the reference case, under the assumption that
the volume of blood in the artery is ﬁxed within a time slice and an blood ﬂow

2

Figure 1: A simple model of non-bifurcated artery in reference region.

rate, u, will have the following expression for continuity:

∂t + ∂uD

∂D

∂x
= 0
(1)

This expression conserves mass if the density, ρ, is uniform within the reference
arterial length dx but can vary in time such that

∂ρ

∂t = 0
(2)

Using Perktold[8] rendition of Navier-Stokes equation of viscous ﬂow we have
the following momentum equations

α2

Re
∂u

∂t + (u · ∇)u + ∇p −1

Re∆u = 0
(3)

Coupled with a ZERO divergence of the velocity ﬁeld. ∇p is the pressure gra-
dient and Re is the Reynold’s number and α is the Womersley number.

The main idea presented in this section is that an acoustic source can cre-
ate a transient pressure wave whose reﬂections in the reference arterial region
is a function of the arterial radii ﬁeld, r(x, t). We claim that

differential pressure gradient field, P(x, r, t) = f(r(x, t))
(4)

Consequently, the classical solution in the case of a single harmonic frequency,
ω is given by

P(x, r, t) = Ae(i(ωt−kxx−krr)) + Be(i(ωt−kxx+krr))
(5)

Such that Ae(i(ωt−kxx−krr)) is the wave travelling in the +x direction (frontier
wave) and Be(i(ωt−kxx+krr)) is the wave travelling in the -x direction (reﬂected
wave) (see Figure 2 below) and both are solutions to the classical wave equation
and kx and kr = wave number.

3

Figure 2: Interface showing Forward Propagating Wave and Reﬂected Wave.

For practical consideration, we simply take A and B to be the mean power
of the generated incident pulse from the nano-engineered pulse generator shown
in ﬁgure 3. The observed echo reﬂections from the incident pulse are recorded
and inverted to determine the set of related arterial radius using a Deep Physics
neural network model that is trained to solve the inverse problem using the
values of the observed pressure ﬁeld.

Acoustic ”Time of ﬂight” measurements are recorded with every reading and
used to determine changes in blood density as a possible indicator of increased
angiogenesis progenitors. The data from the Deep Physics model estimating
the variation of the radii ﬁeld due to the pressure gradient in the arterial blood
vessel as well as fractional changes in the blood density between measurements
is fed to a Large Language Model (LLM) that estimates the likelihood of a
vaso-occlusive episode over a pre-deﬁned time scale.

Mathematically, Let V be such that

(
1,
Vaso-occlusive Episode
0,
otherwise
(6)

V =

.

4

Figure 3: A schematic of the Adaptive Sickle Cell Monitor.

The LLM estimates the likelihood that at time, t = 0 (present) the patient
is having a vaso-occlusive episode, i.e.
Pr(V = 1 | t = 0, Biophysics Data)
and compares it with the likelihood of having the episode at regular intervals
in the future with t taking on discrete values from Z+ i.e., {1, 2, 3, . . .}. The
chosen time period is the one that maximizes the probability. An upper bound
is chosen to limit how far in the future the algorithm is needed.

Time To Episode(TTE) =
max
i∈{1,2,3,...} Pr(V = 1 | t = i, Biophysics Data) (7)

In practice the actual temporal gap between the discrete time steps can be
tuned as needed. In addition to the LLM computing the TTE, it is calibrated
to provide informal recommendations on the next steps based on the estimated
TTE. Where the infrastructure allows, the LLM has the option to contact the
emergency hotline and communicate with emergency personnel on behalf of a
patient.

3
Conclusion

Overall, the proposed ambulatory device has the potential to signiﬁcantly im-
prove sickle cell management by providing real-time information on anemia
severity and reducing the frequency of vaso-occlusive crises by incorporating
Large Language Models (LLMs) and specialized ML models to assess anemia
severity in sickle cell patients in real-time. Reliable nano-engineered sensors are

5

critical to dependably measure indicators of elevated angiogenesis progenitors
levels to assess anemia severity and to provide real-time information to patients
and clinicians to reduce the frequency of vaso-occlusive crises by allowing for
timely interventions and potentially reducing the likelihood of serious compli-
cations. While the development of such a device presents some challenges, es-
pecially the creation of a reliable nano-engineered vibro-acoustic sensing device,
a biophysics model, and the practical consideration of an LLM communicating
with emergency personnel on behalf of an incapacitated patient, the poten-
tial beneﬁts of such a device for sickle cell management make it a worthwhile
endeavor. With further research and development, this technology has the po-
tential to improve the lives of many sickle cell patients in developing countries.

References

[1] Olorunfemi Emmanuel Amoran, Ahmed Babatunde Jimoh, Omotola Ojo,
and Temitope Kuponiyi. Prevention practices inﬂuencing frequency of oc-
currence of vaso-occlusive crisis among sickle cell patients in abeokuta south
local government area of ogun state, nigeria. BMC hematology, 17:1–7, 2017.

[2] Flavia CM Lopes, Fabiola Traina, Camila B Almeida, Flavia C Leonardo,
Carla F Franco-Penteado, Vanessa T Garrido, Marina P Colella, Raquel
Soares, Sara T Olalla-Saad, Fernando F Costa, et al. Key endothelial cell
angiogenic mechanisms are stimulated by the circulating milieu in sickle cell
disease and attenuated by hydroxyurea. haematologica, 100(6):730, 2015.

[3] Solomon F Ofori-Acquah, Iris D Buchanan, Ifeyinwa Osunkwo, Jerry
Manlove-Simmons,
Feyisayo
Lawal,
Alexander
Quarshie,
Arshed
A
Quyyumi, Gary H Gibbons, and Beatrice E Gee. Elevated circulating angio-
genic progenitors and white blood cells are associated with hypoxia-inducible
angiogenic growth factors in children with sickle cell disease. Anemia, 2012,
2012.

[4] Oluwatosin Ogundare. An analysis of electrocardiograms in developing sta-
tistical learning models for instantaneous sleep quality and sleep potential
prediction. PhD thesis, 2018.

[5] Oluwatosin Ogundare. An analysis of electrocardiograms for instantaneous
sleep potential determination. The Open Biomedical Engineering Journal,
13(1), 2019.

[6] Oluwatosin Ogundare. Statistical learning models for sleep quality prediction
using electrocardiograms. The Open Biomedical Engineering Journal, 13(1),
2019.

[7] Oluwatosin Ogundare, Srinath Madasu, and Nathanial Wiggins. Industrial
engineering with large language models: A case study of chatgpt’s perfor-
mance on oil & gas problems, 2023.

6

[8] Karl Perktold, Michael Resch, and Reinfried O Peter. Three-dimensional
numerical analysis of pulsatile ﬂow and wall shear stress in the carotid artery
bifurcation. Journal of Biomechanics, 24(6):409–420, 1991.

[9] Subuola Sofolahan. The development and characterization of a novel three-
dimensional angiogenesis tissue model for testing an anti-angiogenesis drug.
Oklahoma State University, 2010.

7