Qinru Li†, Hao Xiang†

†University of California, San Diego

the search space and alleviate the human bias introduced
by heuristic. And our experiment demonstrate promising
results.
4) We implemented deep learning based RL algorithms
DQN, Double DQN, Clipped Q-Learning and their
heuristic variants based on Vanilla DQN implementation.

Abstract—Reinforcement Learning has achieved tremendous
success in the many Atari games. In this paper we explored with
the lunar lander environment and implemented classical methods
including Q-Learning, SARSA, MC as well as tiling coding.
We also implemented Neural Network based methods including
DQN, Double DQN, Clipped DQN. On top of these, we proposed
a new algorithm called Heuristic RL which utilizes heuristic to
guide the early stage training while alleviating the introduced
human bias. Our experiments showed promising results for our
proposed methods in the lunar lander environment.
Index Terms—Reinforcement Learning, Q-Learning, Heuristic
Analysis

arXiv:2306.10216v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jun 2023

II. RELATED WORK

Neural network (NN) has demonstrated its success in
many domains like Natural Language Processing [4], few-
shot learning [2], face detection [7] etc. Classical Q-learning
uses matrix to keep track of the intermediate values. However
when the state space is very large or even continuous, Q-
table can consume all the memory, leading to the difficulty
of training. To overcome this problem, we can use value
function approximation. Classical methods usually relies on
well-designed hand-crafted features. Even though they are
easy to train when the function is simple like linear, they
have limited capacity for complex nonlinear function. On the
contrary, deep learning can utilize highly non-convex functions
to approximate the value function. And according to universal
approximation theory, even a feed-forward neural network
can approximate arbitrary real-value functions, making it a
promising candidate for q-value approximation. [6] proposed
to utilize Deep Q-Networks (DQN) to estimate the value
function. To overcome its over estimation problem, [3] utilized
double q learning which separate the action value evaluation
and action selection. [1] utilized a clipped Double Q-learning
to alleviate the overestimation.
Data-driven Reinforcement Learning learns in a zigzag way.
Especially during the early stage of training, the robot may find
it difficult to find one single positive sample among the huge
search space. For some game, the agent can receive rewards
only when the game is over. The exploration and exploitation
technique can become useful when the agent becomes on the
track of learning something. For the early stage, the robot
may just get stuck of learning shown in Figure 2. All those
difficulties bring up two questions:

I. INTRODUCTION
The idea of learning through interaction is probably one
of the most natural ways to learn. Though touching, seeing,
speaking, and acting, infants can understand their surrounding
environment without any explicit instruction from parents. As
we can learn from experience, one may wonder that how could
we extend this capability to machine. The study of this topic
is called reinforcement learning (RL). In the setting of the
reinforcement learning, the learner is called agent. The agent is
able to sense the environment to some extend and take actions.
The goal of the agent is to figure out a set of actions based
on its observation of the environment and maximize its re-
ward defined in the environment. Reinforcement Learning has
achieved many success in domain like multi-robot navigation,
autonomous driving and games.
In this paper, we are going to study reinforcement learning
algorithms in a game environment: Lunar Lander. The goal
of the game is to control the rocket of the lander to land
on the moon safely. The environment is formulated into
a Markov decision process (MDP). We implemented three
classic reinforcement learning algorithms: Monte Carlo control
algorithm; an variant of temporal difference (TD) algorithm
- SARSA; and Q-learning algorithm. We also implemented
several deep learning based reinforcement learning algorithm:
DQN, Double DQN, Clipped Q-Learning as well as their 3
heuristic variants.
Our main contributions for this paper can be summarized
as follows.

1) How can we efficiently utilize prior knowledge to help
the robot learn positive samples during the early stage of
training?
2) How can we utilize the prior knowledge without intro-
ducing too much human bias?
[5] proposed to utilize a deep neural network to learn the
heuristic. But we argue that using neural network to learn
heuristic is more like adding features than using real prior

1) For classical RL algorithm, we discretize the environment
and augment the feature representation with tile coding.
2) We implemented three classical RL algorithms: Q-
Learning, SARSA, Monte Carlo Control.
3) We proposed a new algorithm called heuristic RL for
the early stage of training, which can efficiently prune

In this section, we will describe the game environment and
our algorithms to control the agent in the environment. We
will present three classical reinforcement learning algorithms:
Q-learning, SARSA, and Monte Carlo control algorithm and
three variants of the deep learning based algorithm based
on vailla DQN implementation1. We also proposed a new
algorithm called Heuristic DQN, which could efficiently utilize
heuristics to guide the learning. From the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the first to propose utilizing vanishing bias non-
learnable heuristic functions for DQN.

A. Game Environment

The game environment we are using is the Lunar Lander
V2 developed by OpenAI2. In the game, there are only one
agent: the lander. Our goal is to control the lander so that it can
safely land on a landing pad in the middle of two flags. The
landing pad is always placed in the center of the environment.
The initial velocity of the lander is random for every game
play. Therefore, the lander cannot cheat to win the game by
doing nothing. The game would be over if the lander crashes
or comes to rest.
The state of the agent is represented by eight variables x =
{px, py, vx, vy, θ, vθ, lg1, lg2}. px, py ∈R indicate the x, y
position of the agent, x is the horizontal position. y is the
vertical position. The origin of the xy coordinate is at the
center of the landing pad. vx, vy ∈R are the velocity of the
agent in the x, y directions. θ is the orientation of the agent
represented in radiant. vθ ∈R is the angular velocity of the
agent. lg1, lg2 are boolean variables, where if the left leg of the
lander has contact with the ground, then lg1 is true. Otherwise
lg1 is False. Similar relation applies to right leg and lg2. In the
game environment, the feasible range of px, py is [−1, 1]. If
the agent fly outside this region, the game will terminate. The
initial random speed of the agent is guaranteed to be finite.
We can assume that vx, vy, vθ ∈[−104, 104].
The lander has four actions to control its position: fire
left orientation engine, fire right orientation engine, fire main
engine (which pointing down), and do nothing. The fire engine
is either in full throttle or is turned off and the lander is
assumed to have infinite fuel. We encode the action into 4
discrete integers.

III. PROBLEM FORMULATION

Reinforcement Learning Formulation Under MDP as-
sumptions with unknown motion model pf (·|x, u) and reward
function l(x, u), we want to optimize the policy π∗s.t.

π∗= arg max
πτ:T −1 V π
τ (xτ)
(1)

"T −1
X

#

V π
τ (xτ) := Exτ+1:T

t=τ
γt−τℓ(xt, πt (xt)) |xτ

(2)

where

t = τ, . . . , T −1

xt+1 ∼pf (·|xt, πt (xt))

xt ∈X

πt (xt) ∈U (xt)

1) X ⊆R8 represent the state space. For x ∈X, x1, x2 is
the 2D coordinate of the robot. x3, x4 is the horizontal
and vertical speeds. x5, x6 is the angle and angular
velocity. x7, x8 represents whether the left/right leg of
the robot has contact with the ground. U = {0, 1, 2, 3}
be the discrete set of control space including. The details
of control space and state space are discussed in the game
environment section. And the state space can be contin-
uous for neural network based algorithm and discretized
for classical algorithms we experimented for this project.
2) Denote the planning horizon as T. Depending the meth-
ods and algorithms we can formulate it as infinite horizon
or finite horizon.
3) Instead of using cost to represent the value of the state and
action, we use reward here. The stage reward is denoted
as l(xt.ut) for given xt ∈X and ut ∈U at time t. If it
is finite horizon, then the terminal reward is 0.
4) Denote the discount factor as γ and γ ∈(0, 1).
Assume that we are always starting from t = 0, then the
equation can be simplified to







0,
Do nothing
1,
Fire left engine
2,
Fire down engine
3,
Fire right engine

u =






The motion module of the agent is handled by the OpenAI
for which we are assume unknown. The reward of an action
depend on the state of the lander. If the lander crashes, the
reward is -100, but if the lander manages to land on the surface,
the reward is +100. Each leg ground contact is +10. Firing the

" ∞
X

#

V ∗(x) = max
π
V π(x) := E

t=0
γtℓ(xt, πt (xt)) |x0 = x

1
2

(3)

∞
X

∞
X

t=1
α2
t < ∞
(5)

t=1
αt = ∞

We use αt = c/(c + t) as our learning rate decay function.
Here c ∈R, c > 0 is a positive constant. It can be shown that
this algorithm satisfies the Robbins-Monro criterion.

Algorithm 3: Q Learning

Initialize the Q value of all the state to zero;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at in env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
Q(xt, at) = GetFromTile(xt, at);
∆Q(xt, at) =
αt(rt + γ maxa′ Q(xt+1, a′) −Q(xt, at));
UpdateTile(∆Q(xt, at));
end
end

Algorithm 1: GetFromTile(x, u)

Q ←0;
for Each grid Gi do

ci
x = x −(i −1) · rx/k;
Ii
x = round(ci
x/rx);
Q ←Q + wi · Gi[Ii
x, u]
end
return Q

C. SARSA

Unlike the Q learning algorithm, where the update of the
Q(xt, ut) depend on the estimated best action of the next state
xt+1, SARSA uses the temporal difference updates after every
xt, ut, rt, xt+1, ut+1 transition to update the Q(xt, ut). We use
the same ϵ - greedy algorithm to balance the exploration and
exploitation, and the same earning rate decay function to insure
that the algorithm will converge. The algorithm is presented
in Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 2: UpdateTile(∆Q(x, u))

for Each grid Gi do

ci
x = x −(i −1) · rx/k;
Ii
x = round(ci
x/rx);
Gi[Ii
x, u] = Gi[Ii
x, u] + wi · ∆Q(x, u);
end

D. Monte Carlo

Monte Carlo (MC) algorithm is another method to estimate
the value function of state and action when the model is
unknown. It uses the empirical mean of long-term costs
obtained from different episodes to approximate the Q value
Q(x, u). There are two kinds of Monte Carlo policy evaluation
algorithm. One is the first-visit MC policy evaluation and
another one is every vist MC policy evaluation. For the former
one, it find the first time step when x, u appear and calculate
their expected long term cost, while for the latter one, the
long-term costs are accumulated following every time step t
when x, u appear. The two algorithms are shown in Algorithm
5 and 6.

B. Q Learning
The Q learning algorithm is presented in Algorithm 3. The
initial Q value of each (x, u) is 0. We use ϵ - greedy algorithm
to generate the action at. That is given an ϵt ∈[0, 1] at time
t, the policy of state x is generated by

(
1 −ϵt +
ϵt
|U(x)|
if u = u∗

πt(u|x) :=

ϵt
|U(x)|
if u ̸= u∗
(4)

Initialize the Q value of all the state to zero;
S ←∅;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

Initialize the Q value of all the state to zero;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

S ←∅;
while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at in env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
if S not is empty then

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at in env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
S ←S ∪(xt, at, rt);
end
L ←0;
M maps state-action pair to a list of rewards;
for t from T to 1 do

xt−1, at−1, rt−1 ←S;
Q(xt−1, at−1) = GetFromTile(xt−1, at−1);
∆Q(xt−1, at−1) =
αt(rt−1 + γQ(xt, at) −Q(xt−1, at−1));
UpdateTile(∆Q(xt−1, at−1));
end
S ←{xt, at, rt};
end
end

xt, at, rt ←S(t);
L ←γL + rt;
M(xt, ut) ←M(xt, ut) + L;
end
for Every (xt, ut) in M do

Lavg = avg(M(xt, ut));
Q(xt, at) = GetFromTile(xt, at);
∆Q(xt, at) = αt(Lavg −Q(xt, at));
UpdateTile(∆Q(xt, at));
end
end

Similar to the Q learning algorithm and the SARSA algo-
rithm, we use the same learning rate decay function and the ϵ
- greedy algorithm for the MC algorithm.

Algorithm 5: Monte Carlo - First Visit

Initialize the Q value of all the state to zero;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

selection. And the update steps for target network parameters
is soft update, i.e.

S ←∅;
while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

θ′ →τθ + (1 −τ)θ′
(6)

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at in env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
S ←S ∪(xt, at, rt);
end
L ←0;
for t from T to 1 do

In this way, the network can better capture the temporal
information from previous training and only gradually change
its parameters. The sampling policy πϵ is ϵ-greedy policy.

Algorithm 7: DQN

xt, at, rt ←S(t);
L ←γL + rt;
if This is the first occurrence of (xt, ut) then

Initialize local network Qθ and target network Qθ′;
Initialize experience reply buffer D;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

Q(xt, at) = GetFromTile(xt, at);
∆Q(xt, at) = αt(L −Q(xt, at));
UpdateTile(∆Q(xt, at));
end
end
end

while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at for env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
Store (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) to D;
Periodically do the following updates;
Sample (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) ∼D;
ˆQ(xt, at) =
rt + γ maxa′ Q(xt+1, a′; θ′) ∗(1 −ot);

E. Deep Q-Learning

Do SGD for ℓ=

ˆQ(xt, at) −Q(xt, at; θ)
2
;
Update target network parameters θ′;
end
end

The algorithm for DQN is shown Algorithm7. Notice that
except that DQN utilized neural networks to estimate the Q-
value, there are still some remarkable difference between DQN
and Classical Q-learning. For DQN, we use experience reply
technique to reduce the correlations between data samples.
And DQN utilized two different networks for evaluation and

The core idea for Double DQN is to decouple the action
evaluation and action selection. Double DQN uses target
network to select the action and use another local network
to evaluate the Q-value. In such a way, we can avoid over-
estimation problems of action [3], [8]. And it would help the
network to better learn unbiased values. The algorithm for
Double DQN is shown in Algorithm8

Initialize local network Qθ and target network Qθ′;
Initialize experience reply buffer D;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at for env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
Store (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) to D;
Periodically do the following updates;
Sample (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) ∼D;
ˆQ(xt, at) = rt +
minw∈{θ′,θ} γ maxa′ Q(xt+1, a′; w) ∗(1 −ot);

Algorithm 8: Double DQN

Initialize local network Qθ and target network Qθ′;
Initialize experience reply buffer D;
for i ←1 to max iterations do

Do SGD for ℓ=

ˆQ(xt, at) −Q(xt, at; θ)
2
;
Update target network parameters θ′;
end
end

while game is not done and not exceed max steps
do

Sample at ∼πϵ(xt);
Execute at for env and observe xt+1, rt, ot;
Store (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) to D;
Periodically do the following updates;
Sample (xt, at, rt, xt+1, ot) ∼D;
a∗= arg maxa Q(xt+1, a; θ′)
ˆQ(xt, at) = rt + γQ(xt, a∗; θ) ∗(1 −ot);

some heuristics to guide the robot. We defined the following
heuristic functions.

h(st, st+) =

k1 ∗ϕ(st, st+1)
st+1 ∈Bϵ1
t∗
k2 ∗ϕ(st, st+1)
st+1 ̸∈Bϵ1
t∗
(7)

Do SGD for ℓ=

ˆQ(xt, at) −Q(xt, at; θ)
2
;
Update target network parameters θ′;
end
end


,
bθx
bθy




+ βϕ2

aθx
aθy


,
bx
by

ax
ay

ϕ(a, b) = αϕ1

(8)

where 0 < k1 ≪k2, 0 ≤β ≪α and Bϵ1
t
is the set of points
that are close to the landing pad.

G. Clipped Double Q-Learning


= b2
x + b2
y
(9)


,
bx
by

ax
ay

Another variant of Double DQN we implemented is a
variant of Clipped Double Q-learning [1]. We call it Clipped
DQN for short. The algorithm is shown in Algorithm9. When
calculating the target q-value, like double q learning, we
separate action selection and action value evaluation. Unlike
double Q learning, Clipped DQN takes the minimum of the q-
values estimated by two networks. In such a way, the algorithm
can alleviate the overestimation problems and provide more
stable estimations [1].

ϕ1

aθx
aθy


,
bθx
bθy


is the relative angle change with

And ϕ2

respect to the vertical axis, which measures the orientation
change. For analysis simplicity, here we assume the vertical
axis is perpendicular to the landing pad. Generally, we need
to transform the coordinates so that the y-axis is perpendicular
to the landing pad in order to calculate the error.
Heuristic function h measures the advantage of transforming
from state st to st+1. ϕ1 measures the distance from st+1
to the goal t∗. Intuitively, if the new state is closer to the
goal, then we have more advantage. ϕ2 measures the angle
changes. If the angle is far away from the angle of the terminal
state, then we have less advantage when taking action at. The
heuristic function is utilized in the step of calculating target
q-value.

H. Heuristic-guided algorithms

After experimenting with all the aforementioned methods,
we find that those algorithms learn very slowly during the early
stage of training. This also agree with our human intuition that
when the robot know nothing about the task, the robot can
only randomly guess the best action to take, thus during early
stage, robot can only learn positive rewards when it lands on
the moon successfuly, which is a very rare case for the most of
the time. Inspired by A∗algorithms, we introduced heuristic
functions to help the robot better navigate the environment
during the early stage of training.
The robot can only receive positive rewards when it interacts
with the ground and landing pads. But during early stage of
training, the robot can hardly find the path to the landing pads
and sometimes the robot may just float in the air. Thus we need

ˆQ(xt, at) = rt −αth(xt, xt+1) + γ max
a′ Q(xt+1, a′; θ′) ∗(1 −ot)

(10)

For the early stage training, the rewards for most action value
pairs are similar and the long term estimation Q(xt+1, a′; θ′)
is not accurate. Thus by introducing the heuristic function, we
can take advantage of heuristic distinguish two actions which

Average terminal score =
Pn
i=1 ri

N
(14)

B. Neural Network Setup

We use fully connected layer for the Deep Q-Network
with hidden units 256, 128, 64, 4. The activation function is
ReLU. We experimented with batch size of 64, 128 and 1024.
And we find that when using batch size 64, we have better
results. The learning rate ranges from 10−4 to 10−3. We use
Adam optimizer. The experience reply buffer size is 104. For
updating network parameter step, we set τ = 0.001. For the
heuristic algorithms, we set k1 = 1, k2 = 0.1, α = 1, β = 0.1.
Also the decay factor α0 = 100 and we decay αt every 10
iterations. The training step follows the Algorithm7,8,9. Also
we adopted a similar approach as early stop. When the average
scores of the game is greater than a threshold for a certain
amount of episodes, we stop the training. For the testing part,
we generate another set of environments and let the agents
play the games and calculate corresponding metrics. We do
100 experiments for each agent during the testing phase.

C. Quantitative Analysis

The evaluation results for all the algorithms are shown in
Table I.
We first start our evaluation on the three classic rein-
forcement learning algorithm with only one tiling, as shown
in the first three rows of Table I. In this setting rx
=
(0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.2, 0.2, 0, 0). Both the initial learning rate
and decay factor γ are 0.9 for all 3 algorithms. The learning
rate will decay for every 1000 episodes 5/(5 + t) with the
constant factor c = 5. The maximum iteration of the training
episodes is 5000. The final trained model at the end of the
training is used to evaluate their performance. Among them,
Q learning algorithm achieves the best result. However, their
overall performance are still way poorer than the Deep learning
approach. The Monte Carlo algorithm preform the worst. We
discover that the performance of our algorithm is very sensitive
to the discretization factor rx. If the resolution of each variable
is too high (i.e. value in rx is too small), then it is less likely
for us to revisit a state and update their Q value. It will thus
make the algorithm harder to converge.
Note that the performance of MC is very poor. This is
maybe caused by the high variance natural of the MC al-
gorithm. We have tried to tune the learning rate, resolution,
and the γ parameters in the algorithm, but none of them can
result in a good result. This MC is the every visit version.
The performance of the first visit MC is worse than this. We
suspect that this is because the number of samples for the
MC is very little for it to find any meaningful result. Because
the initial value of the Q function is zero, and zero action
means do nothing. We think this is Q value with zero always
dominant the action decision. this is why the MC decides to
do nothing.

V. EXPERIMENTS

A. Metrics

Denote N as the total number of trails. And denote Ri as
the cumulative score for trial i. Denote the final reward for
the agent is ri, ri ≤100 for the trial i. Denote the number of
times the agent fires as ui. For notation simplicity, we abuse
the notation for this subsection. All the other part of the paper
follows the notation we defined before.

1) Average scores Average score is calculated by taking the
mean of scores for each trial. It measures how good the
agent plays on average.

Average scores =
Pn
i=1 Ri

N
(11)

2) Probability of success(PoS) Following lunar lander envi-
ronment’s requirement, we define that a agent succeeds if
its final score is greater than 200 points. Thus Probability
of success can be calculated by

PoS = Nsuccess

N
(12)

where Nsuccess is the total number times a robot suc-
ceeds.
3) Average fuel consumption It measures how many times
the robot fires, which represents how many fuels a robot
would need for each trail.

Average fuel consumption =
PN
i=1 ui

N
(13)

TABLE I: Evaluation results for different reinforcement learning algorithms.

Among all the algorithm we experimented, Heuristic DQN
has the best performance with total 99% probability of success
and 258.23 average score. This demonstrates the power of
heuristic functions and shows that the proposed algorithm
can help the network learn from prior knowledge during
the early stage of training, leading to better performance.
Also notice that all the three heuristic guided algorithms
achieves satisfactory results. Heuristic DQN has improved
near 60 average scores and 30% more accuracy. Also the
performance of Clipped DQn is very good. Also we observe
that even the worst NN-based methods outperform all the
classical methods. And among the NN-based methods, Double
DQN achives lowest average score which is 104.82. We think
this may be due to that double DQN uses two different
networks and may requires more parameter fine tuning. This
demonstrate the drawback of NN-based methods which lack
generalization ability. However for the heuristic Double DQN,
the average score is 228.52, which is twice of the original
double DQN’s score, showing that heuristic can help network
gain better generalization ability. For the average terminal
score, the Heuristic DQN also achieves the best. Even though
clipped DQN and heuristic DQN has similar average score
and probability of success, the average fuel consumption for
heuristic DQN is lower than clipped DQN. We believe it is
because of the heuristic would help the robot navigate a more
greedy way towards to the goal at the early stage of the training
and this effect would help the network explore more direct way
towards the goal with fewer fuels.
We also study the impact from tile coding. We discover that
when we starting using tile coding. We should make the value
in rx larger, because the offset in tile coding will increase the
resolution of the algorithm. In this experiment, we will use Q
learning algorithm. We run three different resolutions with 2
tiles.

Fig. 1: Average scores vs training episodes with batch size as
64. The figure is generated by plotting the average score for
each episode.

and gradually touch down. That is the reason why the average
fuel consumption is so high. Note that it is not straightforward
to compare this with our result in Table I because using the
same resolution but with higher number of tile will increase
the sparsity of our grid. It will make the algorithm harder to
train and thus degrade the performance.
We study the value of the ϵ and how would it influence the
behavior of the agent. The result is shown in Table III. As we
can see, both the ϵ = 0.00 and ϵ = 0.05 have high PoS. But
in terms of the average score, the smaller the ϵ, it better it
is. This means that the smaller the ϵ is, the more stable the
algorithm decision is.

D. NN-based methods

The training curve for DQN, Double DQN and Clipped
Double Q-Learning is shonw in the Figure 1. The training
average scores increases with large oscillation. This is because
we don’t have ground truth expected long term rewards. Unlike
classical supervised learning tasks which have a ground truth
value, for DQN based methods, they use bootstrapping, thus
the network may oscillate as the target changes due to the
update of its own parameters. And from Figure 1, we can
see that clipped DQN converges slightly faster with relatively
low oscillation. To demonstrate the power of heuristic based
methods, we conduct a comparison experiments. The hyper-
parameters for DQN and heuristics DQN are same. And the
batch size is 1024. As shown in Figure 2, DQN will diverge

1) res1 = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.2, 0.2, 0, 0)
2) res2 = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
3) res3 = (1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.0, 1.0, 0, 0)

We find that the second resolution achieves the highest average
score. Then with this second resolution, we run our algorithm
with 4 tiles and 8 tiles. The resolution is shown in the Table
II. As we can see, when tile number equals to 4, we achieve
the highest PoS among all the res2 cases. We also visualize
the behavior of the this case, and we discover that the rocket
will keep firing the main engine to maintain itself in the air,

TABLE II: Evaluation results for different tile coding.

Coding Scheme
Average fuel consumption
Average terminal score
Average score
Probability of success
ϵ=0.00
294.47
-31.96
43.30
0.15
ϵ=0.01
320.97
-26.90
19.64
0.07
ϵ=0.05
290.89
-41.98
-13.38
0.16

TABLE III: Evaluation results for different ϵ.

(a) action 0
(b) action 1

Fig. 2: Average scores vs training episodes with batch size as
1024. The figure is generated by plotting the average score for
every 100 episode.

(c) action 2
(d) action 3

Fig. 3: Q-value visualization for Heuristic DQN when state =
[x, y, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]. The height of z-axis corresponds to the
value of Q. The highest point is near [0, 0]. The range of x, y
is −1 to 1 with step size 0.1.

while Heuristic DQN can still converge and successfully solve
the problem. As we can see during early training stage, the
curve of DQN increases but once DQN got lost due to the large
number batches. It can’t learn any useful information. However
for Heuristic based methods, we can use heuristic function
to guide the robot to navigate the search space. This prior
knowledge helps the robot to move towards the goal when
it does not have sufficiently konwledge about the problem.
Once the robot have learnt enough useful information to guide
it self towards goal, the decaying factor of heuristic function
would gradually reduce the bias and the network can continue
learning.

As we can see, the highest point is at [0, 0]. And when y
decreases to 0, the Q-value increases. As x moves towards
0, the Q-value also increases. Since lunar lander always
put landing pad at [0, 0], thus the highest q-value should
around zero. Our experiment results agree with the fact,
which means that our algorithm can learn correct q-value
from a data-driven approach.
2) Game Visualization
We have generated gif visualization for various al-
gorithms and attached them in the code part. Please
refer to the gif folder or the README file for better
visualizing the motion process. Here we also attach some
images during the motion process for analysis purpose.
As shown in Figure 4,5,6,7,8,9 the robot will generally
move towards the goal and try to reach the goal state. And
we also observe that only Double DQN go out of the goal
state. This also agree with the Table I that Double DQN
has lowest average scores and probability of success.
And for DQN, the robot will change its orientation a

E. Visualization

1) Q-value
To better understand what neural networks have learned,
I choose to visualize the Q-value for Heuristic DQN. For
each action, I plot a figure as shown in Figure 3. I fixed
all the other dimension in the state and only plot it vs x,y
components for better visualization.

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

Fig. 5: Game visualization for Heuristic DQN.

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

Fig. 4: Game visualization for DQN. Please refer to the
attached gif file for complete motion process.

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 20

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(c) frame 40
(d) frame 60

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(e) frame 80
(f) frame 100

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(g) frame 120

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

Fig. 6: Game visualization for Double DQN.

Fig. 7: Game visualization for Heuristic Double DQN.

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

(i) frame 320

(i) frame 320

Fig. 8: Game visualization for Clipped Double Q-Learning.

Fig. 9: Game visualization for Heuristic Clipped Double Q-
Learning.

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(c) frame 80
(d) frame 120

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(e) frame 160
(f) frame 200

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

(g) frame 240
(h) frame 280

(i) frame 320

(i) frame 320
(j) frame 360

Fig. 10: Game visualization for Q-Learning.

Fig. 11: Game visualization for SARSA.

(a) frame 0
(b) frame 40

(c) frame 70

Fig. 12: Game visualization for MonteCarlo.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we experimented many algorithms and pro-
posed our own Heuristic Reinforcement Learning algorithm.
And we have demonstrated the success of heuristic for many
neural networks algorithms. Notice that our proposed algo-
rithm can be easily transformed to classical methods. Also the
introduced heuristic should play more roles in the early stage
training to void the potential bad effect of human bias. And
for latter training, we use decay factor to let algorithm rely
more on its experience/learned features/bootstrapping.

REFERENCES

[1] Scott Fujimoto, Herke Van Hoof, and David Meger.
Addressing
function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.09477, 2018.
[2] Victor Garcia and Joan Bruna.
Few-shot learning with graph neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04043, 2017.
[3] Hado V Hasselt. Double q-learning. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 2613–2621, 2010.
[4] Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone,
Quentin De Laroussilhe, Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Syl-
vain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.00751, 2019.
[5] Ariel Keselman, Sergey Ten, Adham Ghazali, and Majed Jubeh. Re-
inforcement learning with a* and a deep heuristic.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.07745, 2018.
[6] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
Playing
atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602,
2013.
[7] Henry A Rowley, Shumeet Baluja, and Takeo Kanade. Neural network-
based face detection.
IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 20(1):23–38, 1998.
[8] Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement
learning with double q-learning.
In Thirtieth AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, 2016.
[9] Shimon Whiteson, Matthew E. Taylor, and Peter Stone. Adaptive tile
coding for value function approximation. Number AI-TR-07-339, 2007.
[10] Ronglei Xie, Zhijun Meng, Yaoming Zhou, Yunpeng Ma, and Zhe Wu.
Heuristic q-learning based on experience replay for three-dimensional
path planning of the unmanned aerial vehicle.
Science Progress,
103(1):0036850419879024, 2020.