Using Large Language Models to Provide
Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors

Jionghao Lin1,2, Danielle R. Thomas1, Feifei Han3, Shivang Gupta1, Wei Tan2,
Ngoc Dang Nguyen2, and Kenneth R. Koedinger1

1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

2 Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia

3 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

arXiv:2306.15498v1 [cs.CL] 27 Jun 2023

Abstract. Research demonstrates learners engaging in the process of
producing explanations to support their reasoning, can have a positive
impact on learning. However, providing learners real-time explanatory
feedback often presents challenges related to classification accuracy, par-
ticularly in domain-specific environments, containing situationally com-
plex and nuanced responses. We present two approaches for supplying
tutors real-time feedback within an online lesson on how to give students
effective praise. This work-in-progress demonstrates considerable accu-
racy in binary classification for corrective feedback of effective, or effort-
based (F1score = 0.811), and ineffective, or outcome-based (F1score =
0.350), praise responses. More notably, we introduce progress towards
an enhanced approach of providing explanatory feedback using large
language model-facilitated named entity recognition, which can provide
tutors feedback, not only while engaging in lessons, but can potentially
suggest real-time tutor moves. Future work involves leveraging large lan-
guage models for data augmentation to improve accuracy, while also
developing an explanatory feedback interface.

Keywords: Large Language Models · Named Entity Recognition · Tu-
tor Training · Explanatory Feedback · Natural Language Processing

1
Introduction

Tutoring is among the most highly adaptable and consistently successful in-
terventions to increase student learning [10, 17]. However, despite the known
positive impacts of tutoring on achievement, there is a lack of qualified and
skilled tutors outside of private, high-income communities, ready to provide
content and socio-motivational support to students [10]. Due to the shortage
of professional tutors, often certified teachers and paraprofessionals, the focus
has shifted to preparing novice tutors, such as community volunteers, retired
adults, and college students [17]. The demand for professional development per-
sonalized to meet the needs of nonprofessional and novice tutors is high [17],

2
Lin et al.

with training on social-emotional learning, relationship building, and attend-
ing to student motivation and self-efficacy as common topics requested among
unskilled tutors [21]. Online, scenario-based lessons on these topics have been
developed to provide situational experiences to inexperienced tutors [21] and pre-
service teachers [22]. The ability to administer real-time explanatory feedback
within constructed-response questions dealing with common tutoring scenarios
(e.g., a student struggling with motivation) is powerful. Immediate feedback on
errors, similar to the feedback received while engaging in the deliberate practice
of responding to situational judgment tests, is described as a “favorable learning
condition,” supporting learning [9, p. 5].

We present a method of providing tutors real-time explanatory feedback har-
nessing large language models (LLMs). Our approach employs a template-based
strategy leveraging named entity recognition (NER), a subtask of natural lan-
guage processing, that classifies similar pieces of information [12]. By tagging
similar pieces of information, called named entities (NEs), for effective and inef-
fective tutor responses, NER becomes a suitable and viable method for delivering
tutors feedback. For example, classifying desired and less-desired tutor responses
on how to effectively praise students yields the following NEs: praising for effort,
or process-focused praise (Effort); ability- or outcome-focused praise (Outcome);
and person-based praise (Person). Using NER, segments of tutor responses can
be systematically identified aligning with the appropriate NEs. For instance, in
Fig. 1 the tutor response “Good job! You got the right answer, and you stuck with
it” tags tutor utterances to produce the following NEs: “Good job” (Outcome)
and “stuck with it” (Effort). Tagged NEs can be used to create the corresponding
templated feedback: “Saying [insert Effort] is a nice example of process-focused
praise, which praises students for their effort.” Conversely, templated feedback
for a less-desired response could be: “Saying [insert Outcome] is praising students
for the outcome. You should focus on praising the students for their effort and
process towards learning. Do you want to try responding again?” The research-
recommended approach, representing the desired tutor response and, commonly
observed, less-desired responses can be tagged to corresponding NEs. By tag-
ging pieces of information, aligning with tutoring approaches for responding to

Fig. 1. An example of providing a tutor templated feedback that does not contain the
desire responses of praising students for their efforts.

Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors
3

the given scenarios, NER becomes a suitable method for generating templated
feedback to tutors.
Automatic short answer grading, or the process of automatically scoring
learner answers to constructed-responses questions (often applying several ma-
chine learning models), has received notable attention due to advances in AI-
based technologies [24]. Most automatic short answer grading methods follow a
two-step approach: 1) using a representation, or training set, of learner responses
to train the model, using natural language processing methods, and 2) labeling
responses via a machine learning classifier to predict the learner’s score or per-
formance [24]. Presently, advanced approaches using LLMs to process learner
responses are taking precedence over traditional, human-identified feature anal-
ysis [24]. Despite the advantages to using LLMs, there are several limitations:
the model not being well-adapted for the nuanced and varied responses among
the learner population; the requirement of having to train one model per ques-
tion, with related or follow-up questions being treated as mutually exclusive
[24]; and, the need for a large number of tutor responses in the representation
dataset. This workshop paper presents a method of providing corrective and ex-
planatory feedback to tutors participating in an online lesson on giving students
effective praise. This work-in-progress introduces an ongoing effort to enhance
approaches towards automatic short answer grading using LLMs, enabling NER
for identifying relevant components of a tutor response. The primary research
questions addressed, include:

RQ1: Can we apply a binary classification method for effectively labeling tutor
responses, as effective or ineffective, to provide corrective feedback?
RQ2: How can we enhance past approaches of providing explanatory feedback
using LLM-facilitated named entity recognition to administer templated
feedback identifying relevant parts of the tutor response?

2
Related Work

2.1
Feedback Generation

Feedback can have a profound impact on learning and achievement; however,
its influence may be beneficial or detrimental to learning depending on type
and delivery [7, 19, 13]. Feedback is most beneficial within the learning con-
text, delivered after the learner has engaged with the initial instruction, and
when addressing misconceptions or faulty reasoning [7]. Immediate, explanatory
feedback, or feedback detailing the reasoning why a response is desired or not,
assists learners with participating in deliberate practice. The online lesson has
tutors engaging in the deliberate practice of responding to a common tutoring
scenario (i.e., a student struggling to stay motivated) by asking them how to
best respond. Tutors then explain their reasoning and observe the most-desired
approach receiving feedback on their chosen selected response option [3, 21].
An expansion of this previous work is to provide explanatory feedback to tu-
tors on their textual replies to the constructed-response questions. Generating

4
Lin et al.

explanatory feedback to tutors using enhanced approaches, such as using LLM-
facilitated NER, shows promise as a method of providing accurate and timely
feedback to tutors. The creation of templated feedback, including specific refer-
ences to desired and less-desired elements of the tutor responses, is influenced by
earlier results on the effectiveness of having a rich, data-driven error diagnosis
taxonomy driving template-based feedback [1].

2.2
Named Entity Recognition

A named entity (NE) is a word or phrase distinct from a set of words that
have similar attributes [12]. For example, in the text “John said that Pittsburgh
is wonderful in the winter”, “John”, “Pittsburgh”, and “winter” are considered
NEs, which represent a person, location, and time, respectively. Named entity
recognition (NER) is a fundamental task in natural language processing, which
aims to automatically locate NE in the text and classify them into different
categories such as person, organization, and location [12]. In the example, to
identify the NE “Pittsburgh”, a NER model first locates the position of “Pitts-
burgh” in the text and then classifies the entity “Pittsburgh” into the category
of location. As discussed by [12], there are two primary categories of name en-
tities: (i) generic (e.g., person and organization) and (ii) domain-specific (e.g.,
enzymes and genes). Since the present work aims to investigate the potential
of the NER model in providing explanatory feedback based on learning princi-
ples in the previous research [21], we focus on the domain-specific NER model
scheme. In the educational domain, researchers have conducted NER for auto-
matic text assessment [23]. However, the use of the NER model is rarely used in
feedback generation. Therefore, our approach aims to employ a NE recognition
model to highlight the NEs within tutors’ responses, which can be used to create
templated explanatory feedback to tutors to increase tutor learning.

3
Method

3.1
Dataset

The dataset consisted of tutor responses to constructed-response questions within
the Giving Effective Praise lesson, comprising a total of 65 volunteer tutors. The
tutor demographics are: 52% White, 18% Asian, 52% male, and slightly more
than half are reportedly 50 years of age or older. The development of Giving Ef-
fective Praise involved collaboration between the tutoring organization’s director
and researchers to ensure accurate operationalization of effective praise strate-
gies within the tutoring environment. Lesson scenarios were chosen to enhance
face validity by aligning with typical situations encountered by tutors in the field
[21]. Giving Effective Praise aims to support tutors with increasing student mo-
tivation by providing effective praise, identifying its key features, and employing
strategies to deliver praise and feedback. In accordance with the lesson’s con-
struct, effective praise should be: (1) sincere, earned, and truthful; (2) specific
by giving details of a student’s strengths; (3) immediate, with praise given right

Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors
5

after the student’s action; (4) authentic, avoiding repetitive phrases like “great
job” which diminishes meaning and becomes predictable, and (5) focused on the
learning process rather than innate ability [21].
Based on characteristics of praise types in the literature, tutor praise state-
ments can be categorized into three different types: effort-based (Effort), outcome-
based (Outcome), and person-based (Person). Effort-based praise is a research-
shown productive praise type, focusing on the learning process (e.g., “I like
how you worked hard to...”). Outcome-based praise showcases student’s achieve-
ments, such as getting an A on an assignment or getting a problem correct,
and is often, but not always, associated with unproductive praise (e.g., “Great
job!”). Person-based praise suggests student’s success is caused from fixed qual-
ities outside of student’s control (e.g., “You are so talented.”) and, similar to
outcome-based praise, is often associated with unproductive praise [8].
The Giving Effective Praise dataset contains 129 tutor responses categorized
by praise type. Because only one person-based praise statement (i.e., “You are
very smart”) was identified from the dataset, person-based praise was not in-
cluded in the analysis. It should be noted that a tutor’s response can include
more than one praise type. For example, the statement, “Great job! I like how
you worked hard on completing that task,” encompasses outcome- and effort-
based praise statements. Similarly, a tutor response may not contain any praise
types such as, “Let’s work together.”

3.2
RQ 1: Binary Classification for Corrective Feedback

To accurately identify different types of praise, we aim to conduct multi-label
classification. Relying on the praise framework proposed by [21], we recruited
an educational expert to annotate each type of praise for the tutor’s responses
in a binary form. The distribution of annotated praise in tutor responses are as
follows: 52 responses contained effort-based praise only; 29 responses contained
both effort- and outcome-based praise; 26 contained outcome-based praise only;
and, the remaining 22 responses lacked any mention of neither effort or outcome-
based praise. Then, we trained the annotated responses on classifiers. Inspired
by the effectiveness of the BERT model on the educational classification tasks
such as tutoring dialogue classification [14, 15], we employed the BERT model
to identify each type of praise in the tutors’ responses. To train and evaluate the
BERT model, we randomly split the dataset (i.e., annotated tutor responses) into
training, validation, and testing set in the ratio of 70%, 10%, 20%, respectively,
as suggested by [6]. The classification performance of the BERT model was
measured by accuracy and F1 score.

3.3
RQ 2: Named Entity Recognition to Generate Explanatory
Feedback

In order to generate explanatory feedback to tutors, firstly, the categorization
of relevant parts of responses need to be identified through use of NEs. We
refer to the annotation scheme by Thomas et al. [21] introduced previously and

6
Lin et al.

annotate the NEs representing attributes associated with Effort and Outcome,
for 129 tutor responses. In line with the NER annotation in previous works
[12, 16], we apply the same BIO-tagging scheme to this present work, that is, B
represents the beginning position of the NE in the text, I represents the inside
position of the NE in the text, and O represents outside of NE. For example,
when annotating praise NEs for a tutor’s praise “You are doing a great job”,
the word “great” is identified as the beginning (i.e., Bout) of the NE Outcome
and “job” is identified inside (i.e., Iout) of the NE. The remaining text in the
response is identified as the outside (i.e., O) of the NE. After annotating the NEs
for each tutor’s response, we employed the BERT model to identify the NE from
the tutors’ responses. The dataset (annotated with NEs) was also divided into
training, validation, and testing set in the ratio of 70%:10%:20%, respectively.
The statistics of NER annotation data are shown in Table 1 which presents O
as the major tag in our dataset. Informed by the previous study [16], predicting
O would not enhance the evaluation score of the NER model, our study also
did not take accurate predictions on O when calculating the performance score.
To measure the NER model performance, we used the F1 score in line with the
recent works on NER task [12, 16].

Table 1. Distribution of named entities for each dataset by praise types.

% Annotation (B/I/O)

O
B-Outcome
I-Outcome
B-Effort
I-Effort

Full
2380 (76.5%)
53 (1.7%)
114 (3.7%)
80 (2.6%)
484 (15.6%)

Training
1661 (76.5%)
38 (1.8%)
75 (3.5%)
58 (2.7%)
338 (15.6%)

Validation
226 (75.6%)
6 (2.0%)
19 (6.4%)
6 (2.0%)
42 (14.0%)

Testing
493 (76.8%)
9 (1.4%)
20 (3.1%)
16 (2.5%)
104 (16.2%)

4
Results

4.1
RQ1: Identifying the correct type of praise

First, a multi-label classification was implemented by using the case-sensitive
BERT base model1 [4] to identify the effective type (i.e., Effort and Outcome)
of praise from tutor responses. To minimize the potential impact of random
variation, the model was trained on 10 different random seeds and performance
was evaluated using the classification of identifying each type of praise. Table
2 illustrated the effectiveness of the BERT model in accurately tagging Effort,
demonstrating notably high performance with an average classification accuracy

1

Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors
7

of 0.731 and F1 score of 0.811. The results indicated that the BERT model
could effectively tag Effort, which could further help the provision of corrective
feedback to inform the novice tutors on providing effort-based praise. However,
the BERT model’s performance in tagging Outcome was less successful. The
average F1 score for recognizing Outcome was 0.350 with a standard deviation
of 0.235. As described the distribution of annotated praise in Section 3.2, the
number of tutor responses tagging Outcome might be inadequate for the BERT
model to identify the responses containing Outcome accurately. Additionally,
the standard deviation of classification performance for tagging Outcome (SD =
0.235) was four times larger compared to the standard deviation of tagging Effort
(SD = 0.046). The possible explanation for this could be the inadequate number
of Outcome instances in the test set. Thus, future studies should annotate more
tutor responses labeling Outcome to improve the BERT model’s performance.

Table 2. Classification performance of BERT model in identifying praise type. The
results show the average performance taken from ten random seeds. Standard errors
from these experiments are indicated with subscripts.

Praise type
Accuracy
F1 Score

Effort
0.7310.077
0.8110.046

Outcome
0.5960.089
0.3500.235

4.2
RQ 2: Identifying and labeling praise statements in tutor
responses

The BERT model was employed in using the NER approach. To mitigate ran-
dom variation, 10 different random seeds were used to evaluate performance of
the NER model, ensuring reliable estimations of the model’s performance. The
average F1 score of the model was 0.202 and the standard deviation was 0.039,
with the model effectively identifying certain praise entities. Table 3 presented
examples of tutor responses with labeled utterances associated with the corre-
sponding NE, displaying Effort, (highlighted in blue) and Outcome (highlighted
in red). Case 1 showed that the model could accurately identify the location of
the praise in the text (i.e., the text highlighted in blue) and predict the accurate
entity type (i.e., Effort). Then, the model failed to annotate the NEs for some
responses (e.g., Case 2 in Table 3). It should be noted that the classification per-
formance of the NER model still had space to improve the performance. One of
the major reasons was that the annotated dataset was limited or low-resourced
[15, 16]. The model might not have a sufficient dataset to train and test the
model performance. In Section 5.2, we summarized two solutions to enhance
the NER model’s performance: i) data augmentation approaches; ii) and AUC
Maximization approaches.

8
Lin et al.

Table 3. Examples of tutor responses from the test dataset, along with named entity
prediction. True and Pred stand for the true and predicted named entity, respectively.
Notice in Case 2, the failure of the predicted model to annotate the statement associ-
ated with Outcome, possibly attributed to a limited or low-resourced dataset.

Examples of Tutor Responses
Named

Prediction

Entity

Accuracy

True
Good job working through this and trying
some different approaches.
Effort

Case 1

Accurate

Pred
Good job working through this and trying
some different approaches.
Effort

True
Try your best to focus on the next step,
you’re already doing great so far.
Outcome

Case 2

Inaccurate

Pred
Try your best to focus on the next step,
you’re already doing great so far.
None

True
You did it, you did well, you got the
right answer and you stuck with it, I’m
proud of what you have done. Good job.

Outcome

Effort
Partially

Case 3

Accurate
Pred
You did it, you did well, you got the
right answer and you stuck with it, I’m
proud of what you have done. Good job.

Outcome

Effort

True
I am glad you asked for help today. We
can do this homework together.
None
Accurate

Case 4

Pred
I am glad you asked for help today. We
can do this homework together.
None

Through evaluating and analyzing the results of NER, we noted that there is
a need for a more nuanced measure that can acknowledge: partial overlap (e.g.,
Case 3); and true negative prediction results (e.g., Case 4). In Table 3, Case 3,
the model’s prediction exhibits a degree of accuracy (i.e., “Good job” tagged as
Outcome, “you stuck with it” tagged as Effort) but lacks complete correctness
(i.e., “I’m proud of what you have done” mislabeled as Effort). Nevertheless, the
former accurate labeling of NEs can still be used for guiding tutors in providing
effective praise. Thus, the prediction for Case 3 is deemed partially accurate.
Future research endeavors should focus on developing a measure to calculate
partial accuracy, such as computing the intersection over union of the number
of tokens in the predicted text and the desired text. Additionally, the NER
model could also make true negative predictions where the tutor response did
not contain any praise entities and was identified as having none of NEs (i.e.,
Case 4 in Table 3). As discussed in Section 3.3, there lacked accurate predictions
on the O tag when calculating the classification performance score. However, it is
also important to identify the tutor’s responses that only contain the O tag (i.e.,
none of the NEs) since it could indicate that the tutors might not understand

Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors
9

how to deliver correct praise. In Table 3, the tutor response in Case 4 did not
contain any praise entities and this response was not related to any type of praise.
The NER model could successfully identify that the response did not contain
any type of praise. Based on the model prediction, feedback can be generated to
guide tutors on providing praise that corresponds with the Effort and Outcome
named entities

5
Discussion and Conclusion

The construction of automatic short answer grading with the capability of pro-
viding explanatory feedback is a longstanding task towards delivering timely,
specific, and personalized feedback to learners. This study employed large lan-
guage models to facilitate the provision of corrective and explanatory feedback
to tutors, with the main findings summarized in two folds: (1) Large language
models (e.g., BERT) have the potential to identify the effort-based praise, which
can be used to provide corrective feedback to novice tutors on the appropri-
ate use of effort-based praise to students. (2) Large language models-facilitated
named entity recognition (NER) can highlight the key terms associated with
praise types from tutors’ responses. The highlighted terms can then be inte-
grated into template-based feedback, which can provide real-time explanatory
feedback to tutors to enhance tutor learning.

5.1
Implications

Incorporation of a binary classifier can provide automatic corrective
feedback. The developed classifier can be used to determine the correctness
of novice tutors in providing different types of praise. The predicted classifier
results can be further integrated into the provision of corrective feedback, which
is essential in the learning process since corrective feedback can assist the feed-
back recipients in identifying errors and enhancing understanding [2]. Through
the integration of the classifier within the system, we aim to provide automatic
corrective feedback to tutors in dispensing various forms of praise.
Providing automatic templated feedback enhances tutor learning. To
better facilitate the provision of corrective feedback, this study further investi-
gated the potential of NER in identifying the words within the tutors’ responses
that correspond to the correct types of praise (i.e., Effort and Outcome). The
words identified as correct praise in the tutors’ responses can be integrated into
a system of providing explanatory feedback. Fig. 1, within the Section of In-
troduction, illustrates an example of providing a tutor templated explanatory
feedback using an integrated NER interface. Referencing the interface, when a
tutor composes praise that includes effort- and/or outcome-based praise, the sys-
tem will label the Effort and/or Outcome NEs and further provide explanatory
feedback to the tutor. As informed by the suggestions of effective feedback [2],
incorporating explanations into feedback can help the tutor better understand
the lesson objectives and content. To this end, we believe that integrating the
NER model into our system could support the tutor’s learning process.

10
Lin et al.

5.2
Limitations and Future Work

Managing low confidence prediction using the feedback interface. The
confidence level of the model’s predictions is a critical aspect to consider in
real-world applications. The model confidence level could affect people’s belief
in the model’s accuracy [18]. Thus, when the model presents low confidence
in predicting an instance, it poses a challenge. In such situations, it would be
beneficial to design the feedback interface that presents the uncertainties to the
learner. For example, when a model’s confidence level on a prediction is below a
certain threshold, our template-based feedback could provide hedged responses,
such as “Saying “you are committed” might be an example of praising effort. Do
you want to explain your reasoning?”. This approach not only helps uphold the
credibility of the system but also invites learners to engage critically with the
predictions. Future work entails providing hedged feedback responses offering
learners the opportunity to explain their reasoning, along with other strategies
for effectively managing low confidence predictions in the feedback interface.
Enhancing the evaluation metrics for NER. As indicated by Case 3 and
Case 4 in Table 3, respectively, the mode’s prediction may demonstrate partial
correctness, for incidences where the predicted text only partially matches the
desired text or, true negative predictions, where the tutor’s response is accurately
predicted to contain no praise entities. We argue that both partial correctness
and the true negative predictions are useful in providing explanatory feedback
and thus, both types of predictions should be credited. However, the traditional
NER measure (F1 score) might not fully account for partial correctness and true
negative predictions. Therefore, future work should explore the development of
measures, such as the degree of dissimilarity between sets via calculation of in-
tersection over union [11] to account for these cases, thereby leading to a more
comprehensive evaluation of the model’s performance.
Improving NER performance through data augmentation. By examin-
ing the model of NER for identifying the praise entity from the lesson of Give
effective praise, we found that our annotated NEs might not be sufficient to
train the model, which is under a low-resource data scenario [16]. To address
this issue, we aim to collect more real-world data and explore widely-used data
augmentation approaches (e.g., oversampling and synonyms replacement) [5] and
ChatGPT-generated training instances [20] to improve NER model performance.
Robust models for enhancing the performance of NER. An alternative
solution to low-resource dataset is to employ robust machine learning models. As
indicated in the statistic of our dataset (Table 1), more than 70% of annotations
were annotated as the O tag, which was highly imbalanced. To achieve satisfac-
tory performance under the low-resource and imbalance settings, [16] proposed
to use AUC Maximization approaches for the NER task in the biomedical field,
which effectively overcome challenges among low-resources and imbalanced class
distribution. Thus, we aim to further examine the efficacy of AUC Maximization
approaches on recognizing the praise entities.
Generalizability across tutor lessons. Our ultimate goal is to provide auto-
matic feedback to all novice tutors who participate in our training sessions and

Automatic Explanatory Feedback to Human Tutors
11

assist them to understand the effective ways to teach students. Thus, a qualified
tutor should be able to comprehend all the training lessons. Though our study
examined the potentials of labeling tutor responses and providing explanatory
feedback for Giving Effective Praise lessons, it is necessary to investigate our
proposed methods in other lessons such as Responding to Student’s Errors and
Learning What Students Know discussed in previous work [21].

6
Acknowledgments.

This work is supported with funding from the Richard King Mellon Foundation
(Grant #10851) and the Heinz Endowments (E6291). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions expressed in this material are those of the authors. We would
like to thank Dr. Ralph Abboud for his guidance and recommendations regarding
the use of large language models and the application of named entity recognition.

Bibliography

[1] Aleven, V., Popescu, O., Koedinger, K.R.: Towards tutorial dialog to sup-
port self-explanation: Adding natural language understanding to a cognitive
tutor. In: Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education. pp. 246–255
(2001)
[2] Butler, A.C., Godbole, N., Marsh, E.J.: Explanation feedback is better than
correct answer feedback for promoting transfer of learning. Journal of Ed-
ucational Psychology 105(2), 290 (2013)
[3] Chine, D.R., Chhabra, P., Adeniran, A., Gupta, S., Koedinger, K.R.: De-
velopment of scenario-based mentor lessons: an iterative design process for
training at scale. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Learn-
ing@ Scale. pp. 469–471 (2022)
[4] Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the NAACL-HLT, Volume 1. pp. 4171–4186 (2019)
[5] Feng, S.Y., Gangal, V., Wei, J., Chandar, S., Vosoughi, S., Mitamura, T.,
Hovy, E.: A survey of data augmentation approaches for nlp. In: Findings
of the ACL: ACL-IJCNLP 2021. pp. 968–988 (2021)
[6] Gholamy, A., Kreinovich, V., Kosheleva, O.: Why 70/30 or 80/20 relation
between training and testing sets: A pedagogical explanation. International
Journal of Intelligent Technologies & Applied Statistics 11(2) (2018)
[7] Hattie, J., Timperley, H.: The power of feedback. Review of Educational
Research (2007)
[8] Kamins, M.L., Dweck, C.S.: Person versus process praise and criticism: im-
plications for contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental psychology
35(3), 835 (1999)
[9] Koedinger, K.R., Carvalho, P.F., Liu, R., McLaughlin, E.A.: An astonishing
regularity in student learning rate. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 120(13), e2221311120 (2023)

12
Lin et al.

[10] Kraft, M.A., Falken, G.T.: A blueprint for scaling tutoring and mentoring
across public schools. AERA Open 7, 23328584211042858 (2021)
[11] Levandowsky, M., Winter, D.: Distance between sets. Nature 234(5323),
34–35 (1971)
[12] Li, J., Sun, A., Han, J., Li, C.: A survey on deep learning for named entity
recognition. IEEE TKDE 34(1), 50–70 (2020)
[13] Lin, J., Dai, W., Lim, L.A., Tsai, Y.S., Mello, R.F., Khosravi, H., Gaˇsevi´c,
D., Chen, G.: Learner-centred analytics of feedback content in higher edu-
cation. In: LAK23. pp. 100–110 (2023)
[14] Lin, J., Singh, S., Sha, L., Tan, W., Lang, D., Gaˇsevi´c, D., Chen, G.: Is it a
good move? mining effective tutoring strategies from human–human tutorial
dialogues. Future Generation Computer Systems 127, 194–207 (2022)
[15] Lin, J., Tan, W., Nguyen, N.D., Lang, D., Du, L., Buntine, W., Beare, R.,
Chen, G., Gaˇsevi´c, D.: Robust educational dialogue act classifiers with low-
resource and imbalanced datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07499 (2023)
[16] Nguyen, N.D., Tan, W., Buntine, W., Beare, R., Chen, C., Du, L.: Auc
maximization for low-resource named entity recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.04800 (2023)
[17] Nickow, A., Oreopoulos, P., Quan, V.: The impressive effects of tutoring on
prek-12 learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the experimen-
tal evidence. working paper 27476. National Bureau of Economic Research
(2020)
[18] Rechkemmer, A., Yin, M.: When confidence meets accuracy: Exploring the
effects of multiple performance indicators on trust in machine learning mod-
els. In: Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference. pp. 1–14 (2022)
[19] Ryan, T., Henderson, M., Ryan, K., Kennedy, G.: Designing learner-centred
text-based feedback: a rapid review and qualitative synthesis. Assessment
& Evaluation in Higher Education 46(6), 894–912 (2021)
[20] Thomas, D., Gupta, S., Koedinger, K.: Comparative analysis of learner-
sourced human-graded and ai-generated responses for autograding online
tutor lessons. In: Artificial Intelligence in Education. 24th International
Conference, AIED 2023, Tokyo, Japan July 3–7, 2023. Springer (2023)
[21] Thomas, D., Yang, X., Gupta, S., Adeniran, A., Mclaughlin, E., Koedinger,
K.: When the tutor becomes the student: Design and evaluation of efficient
scenario-based lessons for tutors. In: LAK23: 13th International Learning
Analytics and Knowledge Conference. pp. 250–261 (2023)
[22] Thompson, M., Owho-Ovuakporie, K., Robinson, K., Kim, Y.J., Slama, R.,
Reich, J.: Teacher moments: A digital simulation for preservice teachers to
approximate parent–teacher conversations. Journal of Digital Learning in
Teacher Education 35(3), 144–164 (2019)
[23] Walter, C.: Increasing teachers’ trust in automatic text assessment through
named-entity recognition. In: AIED22. Posters and Late Breaking Results,
Workshops and Tutorials, Industry and Innovation Tracks, Practitioners’
and Doctoral Consortium. pp. 191–194. Springer (2022)
[24] Zhang, M., Baral, S., Heffernan, N., Lan, A.: Automatic short math answer
grading via in-context meta-learning. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Educational Data Mining (2022)