Chetan Choppali Sudarshan1, Nikhil Matkar1, Sarma Vrudhula1, Sachin S. Sapatnekar2, and Vidya A. Chhabria1

1Arizona State University; 2University of Minnesota

Abstract—Decades of progress in energy-efficient and low-
power design have successfully reduced the operational car-
bon footprint in the semiconductor industry. However, this
has led to increased embodied emissions, arising from design,
manufacturing, and packaging. While existing research has
developed tools to analyze embodied carbon for traditional
monolithic systems, these tools do not apply to near-mainstream
heterogeneous integration (HI) technologies. HI systems offer
significant potential for sustainable computing by minimizing
carbon emissions through two key strategies: “reducing” compu-
tation by “reusing” pre-designed chiplet IP blocks and adopting
hierarchical approaches to system design. The reuse of chiplets
across multiple designs, even spanning multiple generations of
ICs, can substantially reduce carbon emissions throughout the
lifespan. This paper introduces ECO-CHIP, a carbon analysis tool
designed to assess the potential of HI systems toward sustainable
computing by considering scaling, chiplet, and packaging yields,
design complexity, and even overheads associated with advanced
packaging techniques. Experimental results from ECO-CHIP
demonstrate that HI can reduce embodied carbon emissions by
up to 30% compared to traditional monolithic systems. ECO-
CHIP is integrated with other chiplet simulators and is applied
to chiplet disaggregation considering other metrics such as power,
area, and cost. ECO-CHIP suggests that HI can pave the way
for sustainable computing practices.

arXiv:2306.09434v3 [cs.AR] 14 Feb 2024

Fig. 1: Embodied and operational CFP sources in the VLSI supply chain [3].

lower operational CFP, the environmental footprint has con-
tinued to increase over the past decade and is now dominated
by carbon emissions from chip design and manufacturing [3]–
[6], i.e., the embodied CFP, especially for low-power edge
devices. It is imperative to look beyond the metrics of low
power and energy efficiency and include total CFP (embodied
and operational) as a first-order optimization metric [4], [7] for
sustainable use of today’s modern computing devices. Several
technology companies have pledged to limit their CFP [6], [8],
[9], and this can only be achieved by adopting approaches that
are cognizant of CFP.
Further, with Moore’s law slowing down and SRAM and
analog components not scaling [10], [11], the way forward
towards sustaining Moore’s law to the era of trillion-transistor
multi-functional systems and beyond is through HI [12], [13].
Instead of building system functionality on a single die, HI
integrates a set of chiplets, each corresponding to the single
die of today, onto a substrate that enables high-density, high-
bandwidth chiplet-to-chiplet interconnections. Recent and up-
coming advances in HI, including the rapid shrinking of bond
pitches between chiplets and interposers [14]–[18], enable the
design of increasingly sophisticated integrated systems that
not only improve cost due to smaller dies and higher yields
but also improve power and performance as shown in recent
commercial products [10].
In fact, from a sustainability perspective, heterogeneous
chiplet-based systems make a compelling case for CFP eval-
uation. With the higher yields due to smaller dies, the ability
to “mix and match” chiplets in different technology nodes
(older nodes have lower defect densities and lower CFP than
advanced nodes), lower silicon wastage on the periphery of
wafers due to smaller die sizes, and the savings on design costs
due to the availability of pre-designed chiplets, HI systems

I. INTRODUCTION

All aspects of computing, from small chips to large datacen-
ters, come with a carbon footprint (CFP) price tag. For several
decades, the semiconductor industry has focused on making
chips smaller, faster, and less power-hungry, but few efforts
have considered the impact on the environment. The dramatic
increase in the demand for compute in the past two decades,
fueled by new applications (e.g., artificial intelligence) that
demand at-edge and at-cloud-scale computing, has resulted
in the information and computing technology (ICT) sector
contributing to more than 2% of the world’s CFP [1] – half
that of the aviation industry [2] and projected to surpass it in
the next decade if left unchecked.
Fig. 1 shows the life cycle assessment (LCA) of a semi-
conductor product and highlights the different sources of
greenhouse gases (GHG) in the life of product. The operational
costs refer to the CFP generated by the end user, which in the
case of a datacenter are the day-to-day activities that draw
energy. The embodied costs are the costs that come from
design, manufacturing, packaging, and materials sourcing of
the server class computation resources in the datacenter.
While technology scaling and electronic design automation
have helped to design energy-efficient VLSI systems with

Fig. 2: (a) Embodied CFP versus area of the chip. (b) Comparison of
manufacturing CFP of the large monolithic NVIDIA GA102 GPU and a 4-
chiplet-based architecture of the GPU.

II. MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND

A. HI enabling sustainable computing

HI has offered a feasible approach for cost-effective chip
design to help sustain Moore’s law. A HI system splits a large
SoC into multiple smaller dies, referred to as chiplets, where
each chiplet may have different functionality, potentially built
in different process nodes or designed by separate vendors
reducing both design time and cost. All chiplets are integrated
into a single package. HI systems have great potential to lower
the embodied CFP associated with design and manufacturing
when compared to monolithic systems due to several reasons:
(1) Yield and area As we pack more functionality and logic
onto the same monolithic IC, the increase in the area increases
the CFP due to an increase in materials needed for manufac-
turing and a decrease in yield. Fig. 2(a) shows a result for an
industry testcase in a 10nm technology (using the techniques
described in Section III). We sweep the area of the monolithic
SoC up to 200mm2 and observe an exponential increase in
the associated manufacturing CFP (expressed in equivalent
grams of CO2) due to lower yields. In a HI system, each
of the smaller dies can be manufactured with a significantly
lower environmental cost. For example, Fig. 2(b) compares the
CFP of a monolithic NVIDIA GA102 GPU testcase against
a 4-chiplet representation of the GPU where the memory and
analog components are on independent chiplets, and the large
digital block is split into two smaller chiplets. The CFP of
the 4-chiplet design is normalized to the monolithic design’s
CFP for different technology nodes. The 4-chiplet GPU has
significantly lower manufacturing CFP even after including the
carbon overheads from advanced packaging due to the higher
yields when compared to monolithic systems.
(2) Technology node “mix and match” In a chiplet-based sys-
tem, dies can be implemented in different technology nodes
and integrated into a single package. With analog and SRAM
blocks not scaling at the same rate as digital logic, several
design houses [10], [22] use chiplets in older technology
nodes for memory controllers and analog logic. As pointed
out in [3], the CFP to manufacture chips in older technology
nodes is much lower than for newer technology nodes due to
lower defect densities (better yields), fewer lithography steps
due to fewer back-end-of-line (BEOL) or front-end-of-line
(FEOL) layers, and the better energy-efficiency of lithography
equipment involved in manufacturing older technology nodes

1) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
to propose heterogenous chiplet-based systems as a
direction toward sustainable VLSI. The paper high-
lights how heterogenous chiplet-based architectures en-
able “reuse” and “reduced” chip design and manu-
facturing despite advanced packaging overheads.
2) We develop a novel architectural-level analysis tool,
ECO-CHIP, to estimate the total CFP (design, man-
ufacturing, packaging, and operation) of HI systems,
accounting for various packaging architectures, scaling,
yield, process equipment energy efficiency, lifetimes, duty
cycles, wafer silicon wastage, and EDA tool productivity.
3) This is the first work to build a CFP estimator for
a variety of HI packaging architectures, considering
whitespaces on the package substrate/interposer and inter-
die communication overheads.
4) We evaluate our tool and the potential HI has in reduc-
ing CFP on a diverse set of industry testcases (mobile
processors, GPUs, and CPUs) and find that HI systems
can reduce embodied CFP by up to 70% due to
the ability to “mix and match” technology nodes, yield
improvements due to smaller die sizes, and availability
of predesigned and bulk-manufactured chiplets.
5) We demonstrate the use of our tool in performing SoC
to chiplet disaggregation, considering other metrics
such as area, power, and dollar cost by integrating
with other third-party chiplet models.
We open-source ECO-CHIP for broader access and awareness
within the community and is currently available at [21].

Fig. 3: (a) Dies on a wafer highlighting the green and white regions of
the wafer that are wasted. (b) Comparison of the manufacturing CFP with
and without analyzing wastage around wafer periphery for GA102 GPU
monolithic and 4-chiplet-based architecture on a 450mm wafer.

with today’s latest manufacturing equipment. Typically, even
EDA tools scale with technology, and the latest versions of
EDA tools can perform design faster with better quality of
results on an older technology node [23] due to continuous
improvements made by the EDA industry.
(3)
Chiplet reuse - Reduced design and manufacturing CFP
Reusing existing silicon-proven die not only saves design
time to market directly but also saves the associated design-
time CFP. Moreover, composing custom chips out of small,
algorithmic chiplets, reusable across diverse designs, can ef-
fectively amortize the non-recurring engineering (NRE) dollar
costs and CFP across several different designs [24]. A further
reduction in manufacturing CFP is due to the reduction in
the area wasted around the periphery of the wafer during
manufacturing. Fig. 3(a) shows an image of a wafer with die
slices, the green circle around the periphery of the wafer and
the white regions are unusable. This area wasted is normalized
across the number of dies per wafer (DPW). Smaller-sized dies
have lower area wasted compared to larger-sized dies as they
can fit a larger number of dies per wafer and also improve the
area utilization of the wafer due to the geometric discretization
problem. Chiplet-based systems allow a reduction in total
number of wafers used due to the fact that more dies can be
extracted from a single wafer for smaller die sizes. Fig. 3(b)
shows normalized manufacturing CFP of monolithic GA102
testcase and 4-chiplet version of the same testcase with and
without considering wastage.

Fig. 4: Packaging architectures: (a) RDL fanout, (b) thin-film and silicon
bridge architecture (Intel’s EMIB, TSMC’s LSI), (c) 2.5D integration with
active or passive interposers and (4) 3D stacking with TSVs and microbumps.

up organic package substrate or in a fanout epoxy molding
compound substrate as highlighted in Fig. 4(b). Intel’s embed-
ded multi-die interconnect bridge (EMIB) and TSMC’s local
silicon interconnect (LSI) are examples of this technology.
The package uses local silicon bridges to host ultra-fine L/S
structures (2µm) for die-to-die communications.
(3) Passive and active interposer-based integration involves
multiple chiplets in the package that are supported by a
through-silicon via (TSV)-less or TSV-based active/passive
interposer, and then attached to a package substrate, as shown
in Fig. 4(c). This technology is typically termed a 2.5D
architecture. The active interposer consists of both FEOL and
BEOL layers, while the passive interposer consists of BEOL
layers only, both of which are typically implemented in an
older technology node.
(4) 3D integration uses active interposers to support the
chiplets, which are then attached to the packaging substrate,
or stacks multiple chiplets over the packaging substrate, con-
nected through microbumps or through silicon vias (TSVs),
as shown in Fig. 4(d), or direct bumpless bonding [16]. With
a face-to-back (F2B) stacking of chiplets TSVs are used for
connections across tiers; with face-to-face stacking of chips,
micobumps are used for inter-die die communication.

C. Summary

B. HI and packaging architectures

HI has opened up a large new design space previously unex-
plored by architectural-level carbon simulators [4], [7], [19].
This design space theoretically has significant potential to
lower CFP. However, the exploration of this space requires
the development of models that can account for the different
possible design decisions that impact the CFP. For instance,
the above four described packaging architectures differ in their
yields, assembly process, and material used and therefore have
different CFPs. EMIB consists of high-density interconnects
with fine L/S, typically having lower yields than the larger
RDL layers in fanout packaging. Interposer-based integration
strategies typically use more materials, and layers, and have a
more complex manufacturing process compared to the fanout
RDL and EMIB architectures which result in larger CFP.
Our work, ECO-CHIP, evaluates the CFP for these pack-
aging architectures and the potential HI systems have for

HI systems are available in different packaging architectures,
as shown in Fig. 4, varying in cost and complexity. Multi-die
HI systems may have anywhere between two to tens of differ-
ent chiplets. Depending on the number of chiplets, budgeted
cost, and complexity, the choice of packaging architecture
for heterogeneous systems is different [25]. We describe four
advanced packaging and integration technologies:
(1) RDL fanout integration (Fig. 4(a)) involves the integration
of multiple chiplets on a package substrate or fanout redistri-
bution layer (RDL) substrate. Typically the package substrate
consists of 3-4 RDL metal layers with linewidths and spacings
(L/S) varying from 6/6µm to 10/10µm.
(2)
Thin film and silicon bridge-based integration
uses
a
package substrate that has thin-film layers defined as embed-
ding fine metal RDLs, or a silicon bridge on top of a build-

With the diversity of today’s chips, ranging from low-power
processors at the edge where embodied CFP dominates op-
eration CFP to high power consuming GPUs in a datacenter,
where operational CFP dominates embodied CFP, optimizing
the total CFP (embodied and operational) is essential for
generalizable sustainable computing. ECO-CHIP models the
total CFP (Ctot) as the sum of the operational CFP (Cop) and
embodied CFP (Cemb) as:
Ctot = Cemb + lifetime × Cop
(1)
where Cemb of the system is the sum of the CFP from the
different sources highlighted in Fig. 1 and is given by:

Cemb = Cmfg + Cdes + CHI
(2)

where Cmfg is the manufacturing CFP of all chiplets, Cdes is
the design CFP of all chiplets, and CHI is the overhead from
HI including contributions from manufacturing and assembly
of the advanced package and any inter-die communication.
The operational CFP, Cop, is modeled as the carbon intensity
of the source of energy during usage (Csrc,use) times the energy
spent during usage (Euse) and is given by:

Fig. 5: ECO-CHIP framework highlighting inputs and the models developed
to output embodied and operational carbon. The embodied CFP estimation
accounts for the CFP from packaging (red), manufacturing (blue), and design
(yellow). The operational CFP (green) is estimated from power models.

sustainable computing. ECO-CHIP is integrated with other
third-party chiplet-based tools such as ORION 3.0 [26] to
model inter-die communication overheads accurately and also
integrates with cost [27] and power estimators [26] to perform
chiplet disaggregation considering power, area, and cost.

Cop = Csrc, use × Euse
(3)

In the rest of this section, we detail the models for each of
the components in Eqs. (1), (2), and (3).

III. ECO-CHIP FRAMEWORK

C. ECO-CHIP manufacturing CFP estimation

A high-level description of ECO-CHIP is shown in Fig. 5. It
highlights the inputs and the models developed to generate
embodied and operational carbon as output. This section
describes the ECO-CHIP framework in detail.

We model the manufacturing CFP of the heterogeneous system
as the sum of the manufacturing CFP of each chiplet, i, and is
given by Cmfg = PNC
i=1 Cmfg,i. To estimate the manufacturing
CFP of each chiplet, we make three essential modifications
to [4], [7] to support the estimation of embodied CFP and
perform disaggregation as described below:
(1) Area scaling models Since a system disaggregation algo-
rithm or a heterogeneous system requires selecting a technol-
ogy node for each chiplet, our carbon estimation tool uses
transistor density scaling trends from [28], [29] and transistor
counts from our testcase architectures to determine the area
of a chiplet in a specific technology node. The area scaling
models are critical to the estimation of CFP as larger chiplet
areas in older technology nodes can have larger CFP even
though they have lower CFP per unit area (CFPA). We use
three different area scaling models for logic, memory, and
analog blocks, as each has different transistor densities and,
therefore different areas with every technology node. We
evaluate the area of the die as Adie(d, p) = DT (d, p) × NT ,
where DT (d, p) is the transistor density for design type d and
process p, NT is the number of transistors in the die, and
Adie(d, p) is the area of die of type d in process node p.
(2) Yield models One of the primary advantages of HI is the
cost savings that come with larger manufacturing yields due
to smaller die sizes. The increase in yield compared to a large
monolithic die also helps lower CFP. However, if the die is in
an older technology node, then Adie(d, p) must be accounted
for as an increase in the area may lower yields which also
lowers the CFP, as shown in Fig. 2(a). To estimate the impact

A. ECO-CHIP input description

(1) Architectural description High-level description of the SoC
or the chiplet-based system, including the predicted number of
transistors or logic gates in the chiplet/SoC and the technology
node each chiplet is implemented in.
(2)
Choice of packaging integration technique
ECO-CHIP
supports four different advanced packaging architectures
(described in Section II). The RDL-fanout-based packaging
requires specifying the number of metal layers used and the
technology node; the Si bridge-based architectures require
specifying the range of the bridge, area of the bridge, and the
number of BEOL layers in the bridge; the interposer-based
packages require specifying the technology node of the
interposer and the number of BEOL layers, and the 3D
integration, i.e., chip-to-chip stacking requires specifying the
pitch and size of the TSV’s and microbumps to estimate the
CFP overheads specific to HI.
(3) Operating specification To measure operational carbon, we
consider the frequency of operation, lifetime, voltage supply,
leakage current, and device usage times as input.
(4) Energy sources and chiplet/system volumes Other inputs
include carbon intensity of different sources and volumes of
chiplets and systems manufactured to scale the total CFP based
on sources of energy and across the number of parts.

−α
(4)

Y (d, p) =

1 + Adie(d, p) × D0(p)

α

where Y (d, p) is the yield of die with area Adie(d, p), D0(p)
is the defect density for process p, α is a clustering parameter.
It is important to note that the defect density depends on
p and scales with technology. This dependence is important
to capture because legacy nodes have lower defect densities
which result in larger yields, but older technology nodes result
in larger Adie values leading to lower yields. ECO-CHIP
considers these tradeoffs while estimating CFP.
(3) Energy-efficiency of process equipment With advances in
process equipment, the energy efficiency of the photolithogra-
phy equipment improves at every step, especially for the more
mature technology nodes. We incorporate the energy efficiency
of the equipment as a derate factor (ηeq) from [33]. The Cmfg,i
on a per chiplet basis is given by the sum of the product of
the carbon footprint per unit area (CFPA) of manufacturing a
die and the area of the die and the product of the CFPA of
silicon (CFPASi) and amortized area of silicon wafer wasted
(Awasted):

Cmfg,i = CFPA × Adie(d, p) + CFPASi × Awasted
(5)

CRDL = LRDL × EPLARDL(p) × Cpkg, src × Apackage

Y (RDL, p)
(9)

CFPA = (ηeq × Cmfg, src × EPA(p) + Cgas + Cmaterial)

Y (d, p)
(6)

where EPLARDL(p) is the energy consumed in patterning a
single RDL layer in process p per unit area, Cpkg,src is the
carbon intensity of the packaging fab which is based on the
source of energy (renewable or non-renewable sources), LRDL
is the number of layers of RDL in the package substrate,
Y (RDL, p) is the yield of the RDL in process p estimated
using Equation (4), and Apackage. The area of the package
substrate is estimated after considering the whitespace and
routing overheads and described later in this section.
(b) Silicon bridge: A silicon bridge is a high-density intercon-
nect between two chiplets, and we model its CFP similar to the
CFP of the RDL fanout-based package except that they have
lower linewidth and spacing (L/S) and, therefore, lower yields
when compared to RDL fanout. Our model uses the EPLA
values from [5] for an advanced technology node lower metal
layer with ultra-fine L/S. These high-density interconnects do
not span the entire area of the package substrate but are local
to a region in the package based on the floorplan of the
chiplets. The number of silicon bridges and their placement
depends on the chiplet floorplan and bandwidth requirements.
In our work, we consider bridge ranges and typical bridge
areas from Intel’s EMIB silicon bridge specification [39] as
input to determine the number of bridges that must be used.
An additional bridge is added if the two adjacent dies that
must be connected through silicon bridges have overlapping
die edges larger than the range. The CFP of a silicon bridge-
based packaging architecture is given by:

where Cmfg, src is carbon intensity which depends on the energy
source of the fab (i.e., renewables vs. non-renewables), which
converts the energy consumed into carbon emission. EPA is
the energy consumed per unit area during manufacturing of
process p and derived from [5], Cgas is the CFP from the
greenhouse gas emissions, and Cmaterial is the carbon footprint
of sourcing the materials for fabricating the chip/chiplet.
The wasted silicon area in a wafer of area Awafer is high-
lighted in Fig. 3(a) by the green and white regions. The die
cannot occupy zones within its half die diagonal, reducing the
usable diameter by Ld/
√

2. Therefore, the number of dies per
wafer (DPW) and the amortized area wasted per die (Awasted):

$π( Dwafer

2
−Ld
√

2)2

%

DPW =

(7)

Adie

Awasted = Awafer −(DPW × Adie)

DPW
(8)

where Dwafer is diameter of the wafer, Ld is the side length
of the die, and Adie is the die area. An important observation
here is that smaller dies have lesser Awasted compared to larger
dies as we can cramp in more DPW. This allows for a larger
amortization of the wasted.

D. ECO-CHIP HI-oriented CFP overheads

With the widespread adoption of HI systems, the cost of
packaging is projected to dominate design [34]. Although there
are several sustainability reports from large semiconductor
manufacturing and design companies, these reports do not

Cbridge = Nbridge × Lbridge × EPLAbridge(p) × Cpkg, src × Abridge

Y (bridge, p)
(10)

C3D = NTSV, bump, bond × EPATSV, bump, bond(p) × Cpkg, src

Y (3D, p)
(11)
where NTSV, bump, bond is the number of TSVs/bumps/bonds,
Y (3D, p) is the yield of the 3D package assembly account-
ing for misalignments of bumps the bonding yield between
chiplets. EPATSV, bump, bond(p) is the energy per unit area of
patterning the TSV or manufacturing the bump in process p.
(2)
Inter-die communication overheads (Cmfg, comm)
Unlike
EMIB and RDL-based packaging architectures, which are
limited to supporting few (four - five) chiplets [25] interposer
based 2.5D architectures support tens of chiplets while 3D
integration techniques can have 2-3 tiers of logic. However,
both interposer-based techniques and 3D integration tech-
niques come with large inter-die communication overheads
which require are protocols such as network-on-chip (NoC).
To support an NoC router, each chiplet must be equipped with

Fig. 6: (a) Normalized defect density with technology node scaling. Older
nodes have lower defect densities [31], [32]. (b) Impact of defect density on
total CFP.

the HI-related power overheads, such as inter-die communica-
tion modules (NoCs). For battery-operated devices such as a
mobile processor, we can directly estimate Euse, based on the
battery rating and frequency of recharging [4], [7].

E. ECO-CHIP design CFP estimation

IV. ECO-CHIP SETUP AND REAL-WORLD TESTCASES

Although design CFP (Cdes) is amortized across the num-
ber of chiplets of type i manufactured (NMi) and systems
manufactured (NS), several cutting-edge accelerators, GPUs,
and server CPUs are not manufactured in sufficiently large
numbers to amortize the cost of design across the number of
parts manufactured. We model the design CFP, Cdes as:

(1) Input parameters ECO-CHIP uses several input parameters
which are listed in Table I with their supported range of values
and their sources. For instance, based on the source of energy,
whether it is coal, gas, wind, etc., the Cmfg, src can be a value
between 30g – 700g of CO2 or based on the technology node,
the defect densities can be between 0.07 – 0.3/cm2 [31], [32].
Defect density varies across nodes, and they tend to mature
over time. Fig. 6(a) shows the normalized defect density trend
over different technology nodes. For a given technology node,
defect densities begin to plateau as the node matures with
time [46]–[48]. Fig. 6(b) shows the variation in total CFP as a
function of defect density. Although our simulator can handle
a range of technology nodes for packaging and a range of
derate factors for Cmfg, src, our results in this section are shown
for specific values, i.e., we assume all packaging technology
(RDL, EMIB, and active/passive interposers) to be in 65nm,
the Dwafer to be 450mm, and the energy source is from coal
at 700g of CO2 per KWh. Based on the testcase, we vary the
technology node for each of the chiplets to explore the possible
design space and estimate Cmfg,i. Based on the technology
each chiplet is implemented in, we choose the appropriate
values from the specified ranges.
(2) Testcases and architectures We evaluate our carbon simu-
lator on four industry testcases: (i) Intel server-class 2-chiplet-
based CPU, Emerald Rapids (EMR) [52] (to be released in Q4
2023), (ii) NVIDIA GA102 GPU (2020) [53], (iii) Apple A15
SoC (2021) [54] and (iv) AR/VR (2022) [55]. The input to
our simulator is an architectural description of these testcases
with the die area breakdowns for each of these processors. We
obtain the area breakdowns of each of these testcases from
third-party websites such as [52], [53], [56], [57].
For the monolithic SoCs (GA102, and A15) we break them
into chiplets based on the block-level architecture. We use one
chiplet for memory, another chiplet for analog components,
and a third chiplet for digital logic inspired by [10]. For our
3-chiplet testcases we follow a three-tuple convention such as
(7, 10, 14), which indicates the technology nodes the (digital,
memory, analog components) are implemented in, respectively.

NC
X

NMi
+ Cdes,comm

Cdes,i

Cdes =

NS
(12)

i=1

where Cdes,i = tdes,i × Pdes × Cdes,src is the design CFP of a
single chiplet, Cdes,comm is the design CFP of routers for inter-
die communication, tdes,i is the CPU compute time it takes
to design a chip/chiplet, Pdes is the power consumed by the
compute resources (CPUs) used to design the chips, Cdes,src is
the CFP of the energy source. We model tdes, i as:

tdes,i = tverif,i + (tSP&R,i + tanalyze,i) × Ndes

ηEDA
(13)

where tverif,i, tSP&R,i, tanalyze,i are the compute time for veri-
fication, and a single synthesis, place, and route (SP&R) run
and a single simulation of all analysis respectively, and Ndes
is the number of design iterations. Further, to model the EDA
tool improvement with new version releases, we create a near-
linear regression model based on productivity for different
technology nodes [23] and scale the value of tdes,i by ηEDA.

F. ECO-CHIP operational CFP estimation

We estimate the operational CFP (Cop) by modeling for the
total energy of the system during usage Euse based on the
operational specification give by:

Euse = TON × (VddIleak + αCV 2
ddf)
(14)

where TON is the time for which the system is ON, Vdd is
the supply voltage, f is the average use case frequency of
operation of the system (since most systems are not operating
at maximum frequency throughout their use), α is average
switching activity, C is the load capacitance, and Ileak is the
leakage current of the system. We then substitute Euse in
Eq. (3) to estimate the operational CFP. Euse also includes

D0(p)
0.07 – 0.3
/cm2
[31], [32]
α
3
[31], [32]
DT (d, p)
5 – 150
MTr/mm2
[28], [29]
ηeq(p)
0 – 1
[33]
Cmfg, src
30 – 700
g CO2/kWh
[4], [5]
EPA(p)
0.8 – 3.5
kWh/cm2
[4], [5]
Cgas
0.1 – 0.5
kg CO2/cm2
[4], [5]
Cmaterial
0.5
kg CO2/cm2
[4], [5]
Dwafer
25-450
mm
[49]

Cmfg,i

RDL tech.
22nm - 65nm
[25], [39], [42]
EPLARDL(p)
0.05 – 0.2
kWh/cm2
[4], [5]
Cpkg, src
30 – 700
g CO2/kWh
[4], [5]
LRDL
3 – 9
[25]
Lbridge
3 – 4
[39]
Bridge tech.
22nm – 65nm
[39]
EPLAbridge(p)
0.1 – 0.35
kWh/cm2
[4], [5]
Bridge range
2 × 2
mm2
[39]
TSV pitch
10 – 45
µm
[18], [40]
Microbump pitch
10 – 45
µm
[18]
Hybrid bond pitch
1 – 10
µm
[41]

Cpackage

Cmfg,comm
Interposer tech.
22nm – 65nm
[42]
NoC flit width.
512 bits
[42]
Cwhitespace
Chiplet spacing
0.1 – 1
mm
[42], [45]

ηEDA
0 – 1
[23]
Pdes
10
W
[50]
Ndes
100
[51]
Cdes, src
30 – 700
g CO2/kWh
[4], [5]

Cdes

Vdd
0.7 – 1.8
V
TON
5% - 20%
Lifetime
2 – 5
years

Coperational

For EMR, an EMIB-based 2-chiplet testcase, we perform CFP
estimation on the original architecture as is.

V. EVALUATION OF POTENTIAL CFP SAVINGS DUE TO HI

We evaluate total CFP and highlight the new design space and
CFP savings chiplet-based technologies enable through tech-
nology node mix and match, different choices of packaging
architecture, and chiplet reusability.

A. Chiplet technology space exploration for reduced CFP

We demonstrate how the ability to mix and match technology
nodes for different chiplets in a system improves embodied
CFP. At the same time, we will compare ECO-CHIP embodied
CFP with the existing embodied CFP estimator, ACT [4], [7],
and highlight how ACT grossly miscalculates the CFP as it
does not model for package assembly, wafer area wasted, and
design CFP. As an example case study, we use a 3-chiplet
version of NVIDIA GPU GA102 with RDL fanout-based
packaging architecture to evaluate the various components of
CFP for various chiplet disaggregation scenarios.
(1) Manufacturing and HI-related CFP The manufacturing
(chip and package) CFP of GA102 with RDL fanout pack-
aging, for different configurations of technology nodes for
each chiplet, is shown in Fig. 7(a). The x-axis lists the
three-tuple configuration listing the technology node each
chiplet is implemented in. The (7,7,7) scenario is a monolithic
representation of the architecture of a single die in a 7nm node.
It, therefore, does not have the additional HI-related packaging
overheads. The figure shows that the lowest Cemb is for the
(7, 14, 10) scenario. This is because the analog components
and memory blocks [10] do not scale in the area as much
as the digital blocks and can therefore be implemented in
an older technology node with almost the same area. On the
contrary, in the (10, 10, 10) scenario, the digital logic scales

Fig. 7: (a) Cmfg and CHI, (b) Cdes for a single iteration of SP&R, (c) Cemb for different configurations of three chiplets (Cdes uses Niter = 100, and
Ns = 100, 000) compared with Cemb from ACT [4], [7], and (d) Ctot split into its Cop and Cemb for the GA102 3-chiplet architecture with RDL fanout.

Fig. 9: HI-related CFP overheads for different Nc values.
be ignored as in [4], [7]. (b) Chiplets implemented in different
technology nodes, lower EPA, improve yield, and provide a
whole new design space to explore. (c) Similar to the insight
in [27] concerning dollar cost, we find that larger SoCs are
more suited to benefit from Cemb savings when disaggregated
into chiplets when compared to smaller SoCs. The Cemb of
GA102 lowers by 30% when compared to its monolithic
counterpart. (d) Low-power SoCs have a lower Cop to Cemb
ratio and are more suited to benefit from a reduction in total
CFP when disaggregated to chiplets.

Fig. 8: Total CFP compared to monolithic counterparts for (a) EMR 2-chiplet
with EMIB packaging (b) A15 mobile processor with RDL fanout packaging.

GA102 testcase, the decrease in Cemb dominates the increase
in Cop (over a two-year lifetime), making the HI system more
sustainable than the monolith.
In low-power battery-operated devices, Cemb dominates
Cop [4], [6], and savings in the Cemb significantly lower
Ctot. For example, Fig. 8, shows Ctot split into Cop and
Cemb for (a) the 2-chiplet EMR testcase and (b) a 3-chiplet
version of A15 mobile processor, both compared to their
monolithic counterparts. For Cdes, we assume NS = 100, 000
and Niter =
100. The Euse value is obtained from battery
specification and a battery charging rate for the mobile phone,
and for the EMR testcase it is obtained by profiling a server-
class CPU. The figure shows that the mobile processor has
a lower operational footprint percentage (40%), unlike the
CPU/GPU processors. The improvements in Cemb due to
technology mix and match are lower in A15 compared to
GA102, as it is smaller in area.
(5) Key takeaways (a) We find that design and package assem-
bly CFP are significant components to total CFP and cannot

B. Packaging technology space exploration for reduced CFP

(1)
HI-related CFP overheads for different packaging types
Although the choice of packaging architecture is driven by
application requirements such as bandwidth, area, and power,
the CFP for different packages varies significantly and can
be considered a metric to drive early architectural decisions.
To understand the differences in CFP overheads of the five
packaging architectures considered, we use the large digital
logic component of GA102 as an example testcase. We split
the 500mm2 monolithic digital logic block into Nc different
chiplets and evaluate CHI. Fig. 9 shows the difference in
CFP for these architectures separated by routing overheads
and package-related overheads (whitespace and area). All the
interconnects in the package substrate are modeled in a 65nm
technology for the five packaging architectures.
Silicon-bridge-based (EMIB-based) architectures have the
least CFP for 2-chiplet-based architectures of the 500mm2

Fig. 10: Manufacturing CFP (Cmfg and CHI) for Nc chiplets in GA102.
monolith testcase. However, as Nc increases, the number of
silicon bridges also increases, and CFP increases. The RDL-
based packages have the least overheads for the 6- and 8-
chiplet architectures, but due to their architecture definition,
they have lower communication bandwidth when compared
to silicon bridges or interposers. Therefore, based on the
bandwidth requirements of the testcase, such tradeoffs between
performance and CFP can be considered using ECO-CHIP.
The figure also shows that the passive interposer has lower
routing overheads as the router is part of the chiplet and
is in the same technology node of the chiplet. Therefore,
in passive interposer technologies, due to the advanced node
(7nm in this testcase) in which the router is implemented, the
area overheads are smaller than the 65nm router in the active
interposer. The routing overheads of RDL, passive interposer,
and silicon-bridge (EMIB) architectures are small and near-
negligible compared to the core chiplet areas. For the 3D
package, we sweep the number of tiers/chiplets (from two to
four); as NC increases, the 2D area of each chiplet reduces,
and more chiplets are stacked to implement the same logic.
Therefore, the CFP decreases despite the reduction in overall
package yield due to an increase in the number of TSV/bumps
(the package yield is the product of the yield of each tier).
(2)
Manufacturing CFP and HI overheads with Nc chiplets
In addition to the 3-chiplet architecture of GA102, we also
evaluate the Cmfg and CHI for Nc > 3 where the digital logic
block is further split it into smaller chiplets each implemented
in 7nm. The analog (IOs) and memory chiplets are in 14nm
and 10nm, respectively. Fig. 10 shows Cmfg and CHI for
different Nc. As Nc increases, the Cmfg,i decreases due
to smaller chiplets and better yields, while CHI overheads
increase. The data shows that beyond a certain chiplet size
(or NC), the CFP savings reduces as CHI dominates.
(3) Packaging technology parameters and its impact on CFP
CHI for the different packaging architectures supported by
ECO-CHIP are based on the estimated area overhead and
the computed package yield. For each packaging architecture,
certain key parameters determine their assembly CFP. For
instance, LRDL directly affects CRDL (Eq. (9)) as shown in
Fig. 11(a). The figure sweeps the number of BEOL layers
in the RDL fanout package from 4 to 9, showing the linear
increase in CHI. Fig. 11(b) shows the decrease in CHI with an
increase in EMIB range/pitch. The increase in range reduces
the number of bridges needed for inter-die communication
lowering CHI. Fig. 11(c) shows the difference in HI-related

Fig. 11: CHI for the A15 testcase with different parameter sweeps. CHI for
different: (a) LRDL for RDL-fanout, (b)bridge ranges for EMIB, (c) interposer
technology nodes for active interposer, and (d) TSV pitches for 3D.

Fig. 12: (a) Cdes vs.
NMi

NS
highlighting the reduction in Cdes with the increase

in manufacturing volume. Variation in Ctot as a function of
NMi

NS
and lifetime
for (b) GA102, (c) A15, and (d) EMR 2-chiplet testcases in 7nm.

overheads for active interposers implemented in different
technology nodes. Older technology nodes have lower EPA
and therefore, lower CFP. Fig. 11(d) sweeps the TSV pitch.
Larger TSV pitches imply fewer TSVs between the two tiers
(NT SV,bump), and larger yields lowering CFP compared to
smaller TSV pitches.

C. Chiplet reusability for reduced CFP

Besides the ability to “mix and match” technology nodes for
different chiplets and the improvements in yield with a HI
system, the ability to reuse chiplets also helps lower Cemb
as the Cdes and the NRE component of the Cmfg is amortized
across the number of chiplets manufactured (NMi) and used in
a variety of systems in different applications. Several standard
IP blocks such as USB, PCIe etc., can be manufactured in
large volumes as chiplets that can then be used across several
different systems amortizing Cdes. Further, when chiplets are
manufactured in large volumes, the CFP associated with NRE
costs, such as manufacturing and designing the masks used
during photolithography, also gets amortized across NMi.
Although ECO-CHIP does not split the Cmfg into its NRE and
non-NRE components, this will only improve CFP savings.
Fig. 12(a) shows the sweep of the ratio of NMi to NS for
the EMR 2-chiplet testcase and plots Cdes (with Niter = 100,

Fig. 13: (a) Carbon-delay product curve, (b) carbon-power product curve, and
(c) carbon-area product for different 3D configurations of the accelerator.

NMi = 100, 000)(Refer Eq. (12)) when both chiplets are
implemented in 7nm technology node. Larger
NMi

NS
results in
lower Cdes as the cost of designing the chiplet is amortized
across a larger number of systems. The figure shows the
potential Cdes savings from the reusability of chiplets, i.e.,
chiplets can be designed once and reused several times.
Fig. 12(b), (c), and (d) shows Ctot across a lifetime of
5 years for different
NMi

Fig. 14: (a) Carbon-power product and (b) carbon-area product for GA102.

series, the system latency reduces, but ECO-CHIP finds that
Ctot increases. Ctot is estimated for a lifetime of 2 years,
where Cop is estimated using Euse provided in [55]. ECO-
CHIP shows that as the number of tiers increases, although
the delay improves, the embodied Cemb increases as there is
an increase in total memory capacity and silicon dies.
Fig. 13(b) and (c) show the carbon-power and the carbon-
area product curves for the same accelerator testcase. The
curves show that as the number of SRAM tiers increases,
the energy efficiency of the accelerator improves, reducing
operational power [55] and carbon. However, since the Cemb
dominates, the Ctot increases as the number of tiers in-
creases. Since it’s a 3D system, the 2-dimensional area of
each configuration remains within 1K or 2K. These product
curves enable design space exploration, allowing the selection
of an architecture that meets the latency, power, and area
specifications while minimizing Ctot.
Since the performance of the HI system is very application-
and testcase-specific, estimating the performance overheads
of the chiplet-based GA102 testcase and A15 testcase, which
are originally monolithic, requires modeling the performance
of inter-die communication and router overheads, which is
beyond the scope of ECO-CHIP. Therefore, for performance
and CFP tradeoff curve, we only consider the accelerator
testcase with delay numbers that are readily available [55].
Fig. 14(a) and (b) show the variation in operational power
and area and total CFP product for the GA102 3-chiplet
with RDL fanout package testcase for different technology
nodes normalized to its monolithic counterpart. Older tech-
nology node chiplets have larger chip areas and power due
to HI-related overheads such as white space on the sub-
strate/interposer, additional router logic etc. However, older
technology nodes have a lower CFPA lowering Ctot (Fig. 7).
ECO-CHIP enables considering these tradeoffs, to drive deci-
sions related to SoC disaggregation into chiplets.
(2 Dollar cost analysis ECO-CHIP integrates with a third-
party chiplet-based dollar cost analysis tool [27] and uses
default parameters in [59] for cost estimation. We input the
architectural description (areas and technology nodes) of our
testcase with identical yield numbers used for CFP estimation.
Fig. 15(a) shows the dollar cost associated with the 3-chiplet
GA102 testcase for different technology node combinations.

NS
ratios for the GA102 and A15
with RDL fanout-based packaging, and EMR with EMIB-
based packaging testcases, respectively. With the increase in
the ratio, the Cemb reduces, and with an increase in lifetime,
the Cop increases. On one hand, in GA102 (Fig. 12(b)),
the Cop dominates Cemb and therefore, Ctot does not reduce
significantly with the increase in the ratio. On the other hand,
in the A15 testcase (Fig. 12(c)), where the Cemb dominates
the Cop, increasing the ratio helps lower Ctot. Therefore, in
A15, reducing Ctot requires reducing the Cemb, especially
given the lifetime of these consumer mobile processors is
small. With a NMi value of 100,000, used across all testcases,
the figure indicates how many systems each chiplet must be
utilized in, to amortize the embodied cost across the lifetime
of operation. This analysis is helpful when determining the
required volumes in which chiplets much be manufactured.

VI. DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE SPACE EXPLORATION
FOR CHIPLET DISAGGREGATION

In this section, we demonstrate the application of ECO-CHIP
in performing design space exploration, considering CFP as a
first-order optimization metric along with performance, power,
area, and cost. To analyze the CFP tradeoffs with these metrics,
we consider the accelerator testcase described for AR/VR
applications [55] in addition to three testcases in Section V.
The testcase uses a 3D packaging integration technique with
1-4 SRAM dies stacked on top of a computation unit using
microbumps in a 7nm technology. The testcase comes in two
flavors. The first, 1K, uses SRAM dies of 2MB capacity
each, and the second, 2K, uses SRAM dies of 4MB capacity
each. The naming convention for each of these testcases is as
follows: 2D/3D-1K/2K-2MB/4MB/8MB/16MB. For instance,
a 3D-1K-4M is a 3D architecture with 2 tiers of a 2MB SRAM
chiplet and a total memory of 4MB.
(1) Delay, power, area, and CFP tradeoffs Fig. 13(a) shows
the carbon-delay product curve for the accelerator testcase
with different numbers of SRAM tiers. As SRAM tiers in-
crease (from left to right in the figure) for each 1K or 2K

VIII. RELATED WORK

Two prior bodies of work focus on CFP estimation at the
architectural level: the first body of work includes [19], [62],
and the second includes [4], [7], [63]. The work in [19]
reformulated the Kaya identity [64] to understand how the
global CFP of computer systems evolves and has made a
case to lower chip sizes to lower embodied CFP and [62]
creates a simple model based on first principles. The works
in [4], [7], [63] have created data-driven model, from publicly
available sustainability reports from industry [3], [6], [8], [33],
for embodied carbon estimation and have created a platform
for carbon-aware design space exploration (DSE) [7]. While
these works have set a new paradigm, they are limited in scope:

Fig. 15: Cost variation for (a) different technology node configurations of
GA102 testcase, (b) disaggregating the GA102 testcase into NC chiplets.

The dollar cost follows a similar trend as the total CFP trend
in Fig. 7(d), where older technology node chiplets have lower
costs due to better yields and cheaper manufacturing.
Fig. 15(b) shows the variation in dollar cost as we split the
GA102 digital logic block into NC chiplets similar to manu-
facturing CFP cost in Fig. 10. The assembly cost increases as
the number of chiplets increases and the cost of manufacturing
the digital logic block decreases due to an increase in yield of
smaller die sizes as the number of chiplets increases. The cost
variation in Fig. 15(b) is small compared to the variation in
CHI and Cmfg in Fig. 10, which allows an architect to consider
the NC with the least Ctot from a cost perspective.

1) They do not apply to emerging HI systems where small
chiplets are integrated into a single package.
2) They do not accurately consider the packaging/assembly
carbon costs, which is crucial for HI systems. ACT [4]
uses a fixed package CFP value irrespective of the size
of the package, the yield of the package, and the assem-
bly process and [19] does not consider or separate the
packaging CFP component.
3) They do not consider the CFP from the design of chips,
which, even though amortized across all manufacturing
parts, significantly contributes to the embodied CFP.
4) They do not take into account silicon wastage from the
periphery of the wafer (Fig. 3).
In contrast, and complementary, to the above two bod-
ies of work ECO-CHIP focuses on evaluating the potential
of chiplet-based systems towards sustainable computing by
modeling CFP from advanced packaging architectures, yields,
area scaling models, and design CFP. Our comparisons to [4],
[7] in Section V have shown the importance of considering
these models in the context of HI. Unlike [4], [7], ECO-CHIP
is integrated with emerging design methodologies (such as
system disaggregation) for chiplet-based systems to make them
cognizant of sustainability (Refer Section VI).

VII. VALIDATION DISCUSSION

It’s important to note here that ECO-CHIP is a tool to
perform analysis on embodied and operational CFP of het-
erogenous (HI) systems which has not been done before. It’s
a methodology that is available open-source and can generate
numbers as accurate as the accuracy of the input parameters,
e.g., design time, yields, and defect densities, and is easily
adoptable by the industry that has access to accurate numbers.
ECO-CHIP is based on CFP data from two sources. First,
[5] which provides manufacturing CFP numbers from IMEC
reported on a per metal layers basis for different technology
nodes. Second, ACT [4], which provides manufacturing CFP
numbers mined from industrial sustainability reports
[6],
[8], [9], [33], [36]–[38], and a carbon footprint per unit
area. The HI-related CFP estimation also relies on the same
CFP numbers and is estimated by modeling additional area
overheads and metal layers in interposer/package substrate for
each kind of packaging architecture. As a sanity check of
the CFP numbers generated by ECO-CHIP, we compare our
A15 processor CFP numbers with that reported in Apple’s
sustainability report for the entire iPhone 14. We find that
our reported numbers are approximately 16% of the total CFP
of the iPhone. As reported by the Apple sustainability and
product report [60], [61], ECO-CHIP also estimates 20% of
the total CFP is for operational CFP and 80% for embodied
CFP as seen in Fig. 8(b). Validation is indeed a challenging
problem, especially given the coarse granularity at which
industry sustainability reports are provided and the lack of
open-source data from the industry on various input parameters
such as design time, yields, etc. For example, Apple provides
CFP for the iPhone as a whole and it’s difficult to figure out
the contributions of the A15 processor alone. However, the

IX. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed HI as a path towards sustainable
computing by designing and manufacturing chiplet-based sys-
tems with lower embodied carbon footprint (CFP) than mono-
lithic SoCs. We developed ECO-CHIP, a CFP estimator that
uses architectural-level descriptions to assess heterogeneous
systems’ total CFP (embodied and operational), including
advanced packaging CFP overheads. We demonstrated the
use of ECO-CHIP to guide system disaggregation and design
space exploration in Section VI and integrated with other
chiplet-based cost estimation tools. ECO-CHIP is open-source
and available at anonymous repository [21]. We believe that
ECO-CHIP will enable the development of more sustainable
design methodologies for emerging heterogeneous systems.

[1] C. Freitag, M. Berners-Lee, K. Widdicks, B. Knowles, G. S. Blair,
and A. Friday, “The real climate and transformative impact of ICT: A
critique of estimates, trends, and regulations,” Patterns, vol. 2, no. 9,
p. 100340, 2021. [Online]. Available:
science/article/pii/S2666389921001884
[2] B. Graver, K. Zhang, and D. Rutherford, “CO2 EMISSIONS FROM
COMMERCIAL
AVIATION,”
2019,

co2-emissions-from-commercial-aviation-2018/ (last accessed: March
2023).
[3] L.
˚A. Ragnarsson, C. Rolin, S. Shamuilia, and E. Parton, “The
green
transition
of
the
IC
industry,”
2022,

int.com/en/expertise/cmos-advanced/sustainable-semiconductor-
technologies-and-systems-ssts/stss-white-paper (last accessed: March
2023).
[4] U. Gupta, M. Elgamal, G. Hills, G.-Y. Wei, H.-H. S. Lee, D. Brooks,
and C.-J. Wu, “ACT: Designing Sustainable Computer Systems with
an Architectural Carbon Modeling Tool,” in Proceedings of the ACM
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2022, p. 784–799.
[5] M. Garcia Bardon, P. Wuytens, L.-r. Ragnarsson, G. Mirabelli, D. Jang,
G. Willems, A. Mallik, A. Spessot, J. Ryckaert, and B. Parvais, “DTCO
including Sustainability: Power-Performance-Area-Cost-Environmental
score (PPACE) Analysis for Logic Technologies,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, 2020, pp. 41.4.1–41.4.4.
[6] Apple,
“Environmental
Responsibility
Report,”
2019,
Environmental
Responsibility Report 2019.pdf.
[7] M. Elgamal, D. Carmean, E. Ansari, O. Zed, R. Peri, S. Manne,
U. Gupta, G.-Y. Wei, D. Brooks, G. Hills, and C.-J. Wu, “Design Space
Exploration and Optimization for Carbon-Efficient Extended Reality
Systems,” 2023.
[8] Facebook,
“Facebook
Sustainability
Data
2019,”
2019,

Sustainability-Data-Disclosure Final-1.pdf.
[9] Microsoft, “Environmental Sustainability Report,” 2021,
microsoft.com/en-us/corporate-responsibility/sustainability/report.
[10] S. Naffziger, K. Lepak, M. Paraschou, and M. Subramony, “AMD
Chiplet Architecture for High-Performance Server and Desktop Prod-
ucts,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Solid- State Circuits
Conference, 2020, pp. 44–45.
[11] M. T. Bohr and I. A. Young, “CMOS Scaling Trends and Beyond,” IEEE
Micro, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 20–29, 2017.
[12] S. S. Iyer, “Heterogeneous Integration for Performance and Scaling,”
IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Tech-
nology, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 973–982, 2016.
[13] P. Gelsinger, “Keynote: Semiconductors run the world,” hotChips, 2022.
[14] R. Mahajan, R. Sankman, N. Patel, D.-W. Kim, K. Aygun, Z. Qian,
Y. Mekonnen, I. Salama, S. Sharan, D. Iyengar, and D. Mallik,
“Embedded multi-die interconnect bridge (EMIB) – a high density,
high bandwidth packaging interconnect,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Electronic Components and Technology Conference, 2016, pp. 557–565.
[15] S. Y. Hou, W. C. Chen, C. Hu, C. Chiu, K. C. Ting, T. S. Lin, W. H.
Wei, W. C. Chiou, V. J. C. Lin, V. C. Y. Chang, C. T. Wang, C. H. Wu,
and D. Yu, “Wafer-Level Integration of an Advanced Logic-Memory
System Through the Second-Generation CoWoS Technology,” IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4071–4077, 2017.
[16] D. B. Ingerly, S. Amin, L. Aryasomayajula, A. Balankutty, D. Borst,
A. Chandra, K. Cheemalapati, C. S. Cook, R. Criss, K. Enamul,
W. Gomes, D. Jones, K. C. Kolluru, A. Kandas, G.-S. Kim, H. Ma,
D. Pantuso, C. Petersburg, M. Phen-givoni, A. M. Pillai, A. Sairam,
P. Shekhar, P. Sinha, P. Stover, A. Telang, and Z. Zell, “Foveros:
3D Integration and the use of Face-to-Face Chip Stacking for Logic
Devices,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Electronic Devices
Meeting, 2019, pp. 19.6.1–19.6.4.
[17] Y. H. Chen, C. A. Yang, C. C. Kuo, M. F. Chen, C. H. Tung,
W. C. Chiou, and D. Yu, “Ultra High Density SoIC with Sub-micron
Bond Pitch,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Electronic Components and
Technology Conference, 2020, pp. 576–581.
[18] IEEE Components and Packaging Society, “”Heterogeneous Integration
Roadmap”,” 2021,
[19] L. Eeckhout, “Kaya for Computer Architects: Toward Sustainable Com-
puter Systems,” IEEE Micro, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 9–18, 2023.

A. Abstract

The paper introduces ECO-CHIP, a framework for measuring
the carbon footprint (CFP) of a heterogeneous system across
its lifespan. This artifact is released on Zenodo and contains
two parts. The first is ECO-CHIP submodule from GitHub,
and the second is a folder that consists of the experiments
performed using ECO-CHIP. This appendix describes the
installation of our artifact, ECO-CHIP, and the procedure to
reproduce the results in the paper. The minimal hardware
requirements are any single-core CPU, and the software re-
quirements are Python 3.8, python3.8-venv, with pip 20.0.2.

B. Artifact check-list (meta-information)

• Algorithm: Heterogeneous chiplet based carbon analysis tool
that can evaluate the sustainability potential of Heterogeneous
systems, considering scaling, chiplet, packaging yields, design
complexity, and advanced packaging overheads.

• Program: ECO-CHIP and the experiments are setup in Python.

• Compilation: Python compiler

• Data set: There is no large particular dataset. However, in our
ECO-CHIP GitHub repository [21] and the Zenodo release [65],
we have configuration files and architectural descriptions of the
testcases used in the paper, which serve as input to ECO-CHIP
in JSON format.

• Run-time environment: Runtime is not critical for ECO-CHIP.
The script performs very simple equation-based calculations.
– Not OS-Specific
– Dependencies - Python 3.8, python3.8-venv, pip 20.0.2
– No need for root access

• Hardware:
No specific hardware requirement, at least one
CPU core.

A15.
[55] L. Yang, R. M. Radway, Y.-H. Chen, T. F. Wu, H. Liu, E. Ansari,
V. Chandra, S. Mitra, and E. Beign´e, “Three-Dimensional Stacked
Neural Network Accelerator Architectures for AR/VR Applications,”
IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 116–124, 2022.
[56] D.
Patel,
“Apple
A15
Die
Shot
and
Annotation
–
IP
Block
Area
Analysis,”

and-annotation.
[57] P. Alcorn, “Intel Details Tiger Lake at Hot Chips 2020, Die Revealed,”

chips-2020-die-revealed.
[58] NVIDIA,
“NVIDIA
Ampere
GA102
GPU
Architecture,”
2021,

pdf/NVIDIA-ampere-GA102-GPU-Architecture-Whitepaper-V1.pdf.
[59] A. Graening, S. Pal, and P. Gupta, “Cost model chiplets,”
com/nanocad-lab/cost model chiplets.
[60] Apple,
“Environmental
Responsibility
Report,”
2023,

// Environmental Progress
Report 2023.pdf.
[61] ——, “Product Environmental Report,” 2022,
environment/pdf/products/iphone/iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus
PER Sept2022.pdf.
[62] L. Eeckhout, “A First-Order Model to Assess Computer Architecture
Sustainability,” IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
137–140, 2022.
[63] U. Gupta, Y. Kim, S. Lee, J. Tse, H.-H. S. Lee, G.-Y. Wei, D. Brooks,
and C.-J. Wu, “Chasing Carbon: The Elusive Environmental Footprint
of Computing,” IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 4, p. 37–47, jul 2022.
[Online]. Available:
[64] “Kaya Identity,” identity.
[65] C. Choppali Sudarshan, N. Matkar, S. Vrudhula, S. Sapatnekar,
and V. Chhabria, “ECO-CHIP: Estimation of Carbon Footprint of
Chiplet-based Architectures for Sustainable VLSI: HPCA 2024 Artifact
Evaluation,” Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available:
zenodo.10223759

• Run-time state: Not sensitive to run-time state.

• Execution:
Full execution should take 10sec based on input
parameters.

• Metrics: ECO-CHIP simulator estimates equivalent CO2 emis-
sions. The output will be the total CFP for the input testcase,
including embodied CFP (design and manufacturing) and oper-
ational CFP.

• Output:
– ECO-CHIP will output the CO2 emission values across
different combinations of technology nodes.
– Will provide a breakdown of CO2 values across different
chiplets.
– Provides design and manufacture (embodied), operational,
and total CO2 emission values.

• Experiments:
The experimental setup that we release on
Zenodo (artifact) generates the key results of the paper
(Fig. 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, etc.). The experimental setup is specific to
the results in the paper, where the testcase sweeps of various
input parameters, etc., are present in the specific directory
related to the figure to help with easy reproducibility. ECO-
CHIP GitHub is set up to run different new testcases (not
just the ones in the paper) and estimate CFP of the system.
We provide the experiment scripts and detailed descriptions for
running them. All instructions are provided in README.md file
under artifact available on Zenodo (Please note that this is
not available on GitHub).

• How much disk space required?: Less than 1GB

• How much time is needed to prepare workflow (approxi-
mately)?: Less than 1 minute

• How much time is needed to complete experiments (approx-
imately)?: Less than 10 minutes

• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: BSD 3-Clause “New”
or “Revised” License

• Archived (provide DOI)?:
–
– Zenodo DOI : 10.5281/zenodo.10099731

C. Description

• python3 src/ECO_chip.py --design_dir
testcases/GA102/.
We
have
multiple
other
testcases
under
the
ECO-CHIP/testcases directory.
Running ECO-CHIP for a new design To run ECO-
CHIP on a new design, create a new directory under
ECO-CHIP/testcase/ and add the parameters of the
design of interest into the JSON files. Detailed descrip-
tion for each of the input parameter files is provided in
ECO-CHIP/README.md and then run the above command
with a pointer to the specific design directory.
F. Evaluation and expected results
All the required scripts to help reproduce the key results
and
contributions
are
under
the
artifact
directory.
Detailed steps on how to run each of the scripts and Python
packages that need to be installed have been mentioned
in the README.md file. The results of our artifact will
be reproducible and may have very small variations in
single-digit
percentages.
All
the
graphs
generated
by
the
script
will
be
under
artifact/result_img/
directory.
Running
the
scripts
such
as
fig7.py,
fig8a.py, fig8b.py, fig9.py, fig10.py,
and fig13.py will help generate the respective plots
under the artifact/result_img/ directory. This can
verify the critical result of the paper as shown in Fig. 7,
Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10, and Fig. 13, as the main contribution
in using chiplet-based systems as a sustainable alternatives
to monolithic designs. In addition to generating the plot, the
script also prints the underlying raw data within the plot.
G. Experiment customization
The experiment can be customized based on the input parame-
ters that are provided to ECO-CHIP, architecture.json
can customize the system architecture stating the chiplet
sizes and types, along with package type that is used,
in-depth packaging parameters can be customized under
packageC.json. Parameters under design.json can be
customized to explore more on the design CFP. Customizing
node_list.txt can help in exploring across different
nodes. All the details for each of the input parameter files
are explained under ECO-CHIP/README.md.

1) How to access: The artifact to regenerate all the results
in the paper is available on open-source Zenodo [65]. ECO-
CHIP simulator is available on GitHub [21].
2) Hardware dependencies: A CPU with at least one core.
3) Software dependencies: The artifact and the tool are
implemented in Python 3.8 and require several packages that
help run the tool. A full detailed list of required packages
is in requirments.txt file. The requirments.txt is
available in the repository.
4) Data sets: Our GitHub repository [21] contains test-
cases that were used in paper, most of the files are
in JSON format. Detailed descriptions of each of these
files are provided in README.md file under the reposi-
tory. The architecture.json contains high-level ar-
chitecture details of each chiplet and the packaging type,
designC.json contains input parameters needed for design
CFP, node_list.txt specifies the technology nodes of
interest for CFP exploration, operationalC.json spec-
ifies details about the lifetime and packageC.json has
specific parameters related to packaging. The description of
each testcase in our dataset is provided in [21].

D. Installation

The installation for ECO-CHIP simulator and all the experi-
ments in the artifact repository are the same. Once the zip file
is downloaded from Zenodo [65] or cloned from GitHub [21],
it requires creating a virtual Python environment to install all
the packages via pip. Based on the following instructions:

• cd ECO-CHIP-AE or cd ECO-CHIP

• python3 -m venv eco-chip

• source eco-chip/bin/activate

• pip3 install -r requirements.txt
The source eco-chip/bin/activate assumes using
bash shell on the Unix environment.

E. Experiment workflow

Experiments to regenerate results in the paper The artifact
directory available on Zenodo contains scripts and details
on regenerating the results in the paper. The README file
in each folder details how to run each experiment. To run
all experiments, after installation (as described in the top-
level README), from the artifact folder, run the bash script
run_all.sh in the virtual environment. A specific experi-
ment can be run from its unique folder. For example,

H. Methodology
Submission, reviewing, and badging methodology:

•
review-badging

•

• cd artifact/fig2

•

• python3 fig2a.py