Rating-Based Reinforcement Learning

Devin White1, Mingkang Wu1, Ellen Novoseller2, Vernon J. Lawhern2, Nicholas Waytowich2,
Yongcan Cao1

1University of Texas, San Antonio
2DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

arXiv:2307.16348v2 [cs.LG] 29 Jan 2024

without directly handcrafting the reward. Existing work
on reward learning includes inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) (Ziebart et al. 2008), preference-based reinforcement
learning (PbRL) (Christiano et al. 2017), and the combina-
tion of demonstrations and relative preferences, e.g. learning
from preferences over demonstrations (Brown et al. 2019).
Existing human-guided reward learning approaches have
demonstrated effective performance in various tasks. How-
ever, they suffer from some key limitations. For example,
IRL requires expert demonstrations and hence, cannot be di-
rectly applied to tasks that are difficult for humans to demon-
strate. PbRL is a practical approach to learning rewards for
RL, since it is straightforward for humans to provide accu-
rate relative preference information. Yet, RL from pairwise
preferences suffers from some key disadvantages. First, each
pairwise preference provides only a single bit of informa-
tion, which can result in sample inefficiency. In addition, due
to their binary nature, standard preference queries do not in-
dicate how much better or worse one sample is than another.
Furthermore, because preference queries are relative, they
cannot directly provide a global view of each sample’s abso-
lute quality (good vs. bad); for instance, if all choices shown
to the user are of poor quality, the user cannot say, “A is bet-
ter than B, but they’re both bad!”. Thus, a PbRL algorithm
may be more easily trapped in a local optimum, and cannot
know to what extent its performance approaches the user’s
goal. Finally, PbRL methods often require strict preferences,
such that comparisons between similar-quality or incompa-
rable trajectories cannot be used in reward learning. While
some works use weak preference queries (Bıyık et al. 2020;
Bıyık, Talati, and Sadigh 2022), in which the user can state
that two choices are equally preferable, there is no way to
specify the quality (good vs. poor) of such trajectories; thus,
valuable information remains untapped.
The objective of this paper is to design a new rating-
based RL (RbRL) approach that infers reward functions
via multi-class human ratings. RbRL differs from IRL and
PbRL in that it leverages human ratings on individual sam-
ples, whereas IRL uses demonstrations and PbRL uses rel-
ative pairwise comparisons. In each query, RbRL displays
one trajectory to a human and requests the human to pro-
vide a discrete rating. The number of rating classes can be
as low as two, e.g. “bad” and “good”, and can be as high
as desired. For example, when the number of rating classes

Abstract

This paper develops a novel rating-based reinforcement learn-
ing (RbRL) approach that uses human ratings to obtain hu-
man guidance in reinforcement learning. Different from the
existing preference-based and ranking-based reinforcement
learning paradigms, based on human relative preferences over
sample pairs, the proposed rating-based reinforcement learn-
ing approach is based on human evaluation of individual tra-
jectories without relative comparisons between sample pairs.
The rating-based reinforcement learning approach builds on
a new prediction model for human ratings and a novel multi-
class loss function. We finally conduct several experimental
studies based on synthetic ratings and real human ratings to
evaluate the performance of the new rating-based reinforce-
ment learning approach.

Introduction
With the development of deep neural network theory and
improvements in computing hardware, deep reinforcement
learning (RL) has become capable of handling complex
tasks with large state and/or action spaces (e.g., Go and Atari
games) and yielding human-level or better-than-human-
level performance (Silver et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2015).
Numerous approaches, such as DQN (Mnih et al. 2015),
DDPG (Lillicrap et al. 2015), PPO (Schulman et al. 2017),
and SAC (Haarnoja et al. 2018) have been developed to ad-
dress challenges such as stability, exploration, and conver-
gence for various applications (Li 2019) such as robotic con-
trol, autonomous driving, and gaming. Despite the important
and fundamental advances behind these algorithms, one key
obstacle for the wide application of deep RL is the required
knowledge of a reward function, which is often unavailable
in practical applications.
Although human experts could design reward functions
in some domains, the cost is high because human experts
need to understand the relationship between the mission
objective and state-action values and may need to spend
extensive time adjusting reward parameters and trade-offs
not to encounter adverse behaviors such as reward hack-
ing (Amodei et al. 2016). Another approach is to uti-
lize qualitative human inputs indirectly to learn a reward
function, such that humans guide reward function design

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence ( All rights reserved.

Problem Formulation
We consider a Markov decision process without reward
(MDP\R) augmented with ratings, which is a tuple of the
form (S, A, T, ρ, γ, n). Here, S is the set of states, A is
the set of possible actions, T : S × A × S →[0, 1] is a
state transition probability function specifying the probabil-
ity p(s′ | s, a) of reaching state s′ ∈S after taking action
a in state s, ρ : S →[0, 1] specifies the initial state distri-
bution, γ is a discount factor, and n is the number of rating
classes. The learning agent interacts with the environment
through rollout trajectories, where a length-k trajectory seg-
ment takes the form (s1, a1, s2, a2, . . . , sk, ak). A policy π
is a function that maps states to actions, such that π(a | s) is
the probability of taking action a ∈A in state s ∈S.
In traditional RL, the environment would receive a reward
signal r : S × A →R, mapping state-action pairs to a nu-
merical reward, such that at time-step t, the algorithm re-
ceives a reward rt = r(st, at), where (st, at) is the state-
action pair at time t. Accordingly, the standard RL prob-
lem can be formulated as a search for the optimal policy
π∗, where π∗= arg maxπ
P∞
t=0 E(st,at)∼ρπ
h
γtr(st, at)
i
,

Related Work
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) seeks to infer re-
ward functions from demonstrations such that the learned
reward functions generate behaviors that are similar to
the demonstrations. Numerous IRL methods (Ng, Rus-
sell et al. 2000), such as maximum entropy IRL (Ziebart
et al. 2008; Wulfmeier, Ondruska, and Posner 2015), non-
linear IRL (Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016), Bayesian
IRL (Levine, Popovic, and Koltun 2011; Choi and Kim
2011, 2012), adversarial IRL (Fu, Luo, and Levine 2018),
and behavioral cloning IRL (Szot et al. 2022) have been de-
veloped to infer reward functions. The need for demonstra-
tions often makes these IRL methods costly, since human
experts are needed to provide demonstrations.
Instead of requiring human demonstrations, PbRL (Wirth
et al. 2017; Christiano et al. 2017; Ibarz et al. 2018; Liang
et al. 2022; Zhan, Tao, and Cao 2021; Xu et al. 2020; Lee,
Smith, and Abbeel 2021; Park et al. 2022) leverages human
pairwise preferences over trajectory pairs to learn reward
functions. Querying humans for pairwise preferences rather
than demonstrations can dramatically save human time. In
addition, by leveraging techniques such as adversarial neu-
ral networks (Zhan, Tao, and Cao 2021), additional human
time can be saved by learning a well-performing model to
predict human preference. Another benefit of PbRL is that
humans can provide preferences with respect to uncertainty
to promote exploration (Liang et al. 2022). Despite these
benefits, PbRL can be ineffective, especially for complex
environments, because pairwise preferences only provide

at ∼π(·|st), and ρπ is the marginal state-action distribu-
tion induced by the policy π. Note that standard RL assumes
the availability of the reward function r. When such a re-
ward function is unavailable, standard RL and its variants
may not be used to derive control policies. Instead, we as-
sume that the user can assign any given trajectory segment
τ = (s1, a1, . . . , sk, ak) a rating in the set {0, 1, . . . , n −1}
indicating the quality of that segment, where 0 is the lowest

Rating-based Reinforcement Learning
Different from the binary-class reward learning in Christiano
et al. (2017) that utilizes relative human preferences between
segment pairs, RbRL utilizes non-binary multi-class ratings
for individual segments. We call this a multi-class reinforce-
ment learning approach based on ratings.

Qσ(i) =
e−k( ˜
R(σ)−¯
Ri)( ˜
R(σ)−¯
Ri+1)
Pn−1
j=0 e−k( ˜
R(σ)−¯
Rj)( ˜
R(σ)−¯
Rj+1) ,
(3)

Modeling Reward and Return
Our approach learns a reward model ˆr : S × A →R
that predicts state-action rewards ˆr(s, a). We further de-
fine ˆR(σ) := Pk
t=1 γt−1ˆr(st, at) as the cumulative dis-
counted reward, or the return, of length-k trajectory segment
σ. Larger ˆR(σ) corresponds to a higher predicted human rat-
ing for segment σ. Next, we define ˜R(σ) as a function map-
ping a trajectory segment σ to an estimated total discounted
reward, normalized to fall in the interval [0, 1] based on the
dataset of rated trajectory segments X:

where k is a hyperparameter modeling human label noisi-
ness, and the denominator ensures that Pn−1
i=0 Qσ(i) = 1,
i.e. that the class probabilities sum to 1.
To gain intuition for Equation (3), note that when ˜R(σ) ∈
( ¯Ri, ¯Ri+1), such that the predicted return falls within rating
class i’s predicted boundaries, then −( ˜R(σ) −¯Ri)( ˜R(σ) −
¯Ri+1) ≥0 while −( ˜R(σ) −¯Rj)( ˜R(σ) −¯Rj+1) ≤0 for
all j ̸= i. This means that Qσ(i) ≥Qσ(j), j ̸= i, so that
the model assigns category i the highest class probability,
as desired. Furthermore, we note that Qσ(i) is maximized
when ˜R(σ) = 1

2( ¯Ri + ¯Ri+1), such that the predicted return
falls directly in the center of category i’s predicted range.
As ˜R(σ) becomes increasingly further from 1

˜R(σ) =
ˆR(σ) −minσ′∈X ˆR(σ′)

maxσ′∈X ˆR(σ′) −minσ′∈X ˆR(σ′)
.
(1)

2( ¯Ri + ¯Ri+1),
the modeled probability Qσ(i) of class i monotonically de-
creases. These probability trends are illustrated in Figure 8
in the Appendix. We next show how to compute the class
boundaries ¯Ri, i = 1, . . . , n −1.

Novel Rating-Based Cross-Entropy Loss Function
To construct a new (cross-entropy) loss function that can
take multi-class human ratings as the input, we need to es-
timate the human’s rating class predictions. In addition, the
range of the estimated rating class should belong to the in-
terval [0, 1] for the cross-entropy computation. We here pro-
pose a new multi-class cross-entropy loss given by:

Modeling Boundaries between Rating Categories
Next, we discuss how to model the boundaries between rat-
ing categories, 0 =: ¯R0 ≤¯R1 ≤. . . ≤¯Rn := 1. This re-
quires selecting the range, or the upper and lower bounds of
˜R, corresponding to each rating class. We determine these
boundary values based on the distribution of ˜R(σ) for the
trajectory segments σ ∈X and the number of observed sam-
ples in X from each rating class. We select the ¯Ri values
such that the number of training data samples that the model
assigns to each modeled rating class matches the number of
samples in X that the human assigned to that rating class.
Note that this does not require the predicted ratings based
on ˜R(σ) to match the human ratings for σ in the training
data X, but ensures that the proportions of segments in the
training dataset X assigned to each rating class matches that
in X. This matching in rating class proportions is desirable
for learning an appropriate reward function based on hu-
man preference, since different humans could give ratings in

n−1
X

i=0
µσ(i) log

Qσ(i)

!

L(ˆr) = −
X

,
(2)

σ∈X

where X is the collected dataset of user-labeled segments,
µσ(i) is an indicator that equals 1 when the user assigns
rating i to trajectory segment σ, and Qσ(i) ∈[0, 1] is the
estimated probability that the human assigns the segment σ
to the ith rating class. Next, we will model the probabilities
Qσ(i) of the human choosing each rating class. Notably, we
do this without comparing the segment σ to other segments.

Modeling Human Rating Probabilities
We next describe our model for Qσ(i) based on the normal-
ized predicted returns ˜R(σ). To model the probability that σ

900

800

700

Mean Reward

600

500

400

¯Ri =
˜Rkcum
i−1 + ˜R1+kcum
i−1
2
,
i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n −1},
(4)

Preferences
Ratings (n=2)
Ratings (n=3)
Ratings (n=4)
Ratings (n=5)
Ratings (n=6)

300

200

where kcum
i
:= Pi
j=0 kj is the total number of segments that
the human assigned to any rating category j ≤i. When the
user has not assigned any ratings within a particular cate-
gory, i.e., ki = 0 for some i, then we define the upper bound
for category i as ¯Rki+1 := ¯Rki.
This definition guarantees that when all normalized re-
turn predictions ˜R(σ), σ ∈X, are distinct, then our model
places k0 segments within interval [ ¯R0, ¯R1), ki segments
within each interval ( ¯Ri, ¯Ri+1) for 1 ≤i ≤n−2, and kn−1
segments in ( ¯Rn−1, ¯Rn], and thus predicts that ki segments
most likely have rating i.

100

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

500

400

Mean Reward

300

200

Preferences
Ratings (n=2)
Ratings (n=3)
Ratings (n=4)
Ratings (n=5)
Ratings (n=6)

Synthetic Experiments
Setup
We conduct synthetic experiments based on the setup in Lee
et al. (2021) to evaluate RbRL relative to the PbRL base-
line (Lee et al. 2021). The code can be found at
//rb.gy/tdpc4y. The goal is to learn to perform a task by
obtaining feedback from a teacher, in this case a synthetic
human. For the PbRL baseline, we generate synthetic feed-
back such that in each queried pair of segments, the seg-
ment with the higher ground truth cumulative reward is pre-
ferred. In contrast to the synthetic preferences between sam-
ple pairs in Lee et al. (2021), RbRL was given synthetic rat-
ings generated for individual samples, where these ratings
were given by comparing the sample’s ground truth return to
the ground truth rating class boundaries. For simplicity, we
selected these ground truth rating class boundaries so that
rating classes are evenly spaced in reward space.
For the synthetic PbRL experiments, we selected pref-
erence queries using the ensemble disagreement approach
in Lee et al. (2021). We extend this method to select rat-
ing queries for the synthetic RbRL experiments, designing
an ensemble-based approach as in Lee et al. (2021) to se-
lect trajectory segments for which to obtain synthetic rat-
ings. First, we train a reward predictor ensemble and obtain
the predicted reward for every candidate segment and en-
semble member. We then select the segment with the largest
standard deviation over the ensemble to receive a rating la-
bel. We study the Walker and Quadruped tasks in Lee et al.
(2021), with 1000 and 2000 synthetic queries, respectively.
For all synthetic experiments, the reward network param-
eters are optimized to minimize the cross entropy loss (2)

100

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

Figure 1: Performance of RbRL in synthetic experiments for
different n, compared to PbRL: mean reward ± standard er-
ror over 10 runs for Walker (top) and Quadruped (bottom).

Results

Figure 1 shows the performance of RbRL for different num-
bers of rating classes (i.e. values of n) and PbRL for two en-
vironments from Lee et al. (2021): Walker and Quadruped.
We observe that a higher number of rating classes yields bet-
ter performance for Walker. In addition, RbRL with n = 5, 6
outperforms PbRL. However, for Quadruped, while RbRL
with n = 2, 3 still outperforms PbRL, a higher number of
rating classes decreases performance; this decrease may be
caused by the selection of rating class boundaries used to
generate the synthetic feedback. The results indicate that
RbRL is effective and can provide better performance than
PbRL even if synthetic ratings feedback is generated using
reward thresholds that are evenly distributed, without further
optimization of their selection. We expect further optimiza-
tion of the boundaries used to generate synthetic feedback
to yield improved performance. For our experiments, we de-
fined the rating boundaries by finding the maximum possible
reward range for a segment and evenly dividing by the num-
ber of rating classes.

To evaluate the effectiveness of RbRL for non-expert users,
we conducted an IRB-approved human user study. We con-
ducted tests on 3 of the OpenAI Gym MuJoCo Environ-
ments also used in Christiano et al. (2017): Swimmer, Hop-
per and Cheetah. A total of 20 participants were recruited
(7 for Cheetah, 7 for Swimmer, and 6 for Hopper). In our
experiments, we provided a single 1 to 2 second long video
segment to query users for each rating, while we provided
pairs of 1 to 2 second videos to obtain human pairwise pref-
erences. For Cheetah, the goal is to move the agent to the
right as fast as possible; this is the same goal encoded in the
default hand-crafted environment reward. Similarly, the goal
for Swimmer matches that of the default hand-crafted envi-
ronment reward. However, for Hopper, we instructed users
to teach the agent to perform a backflip, which differs from
the goal encoded by the default hand-crafted environment
reward. We chose to study the back flip task to see how
well RbRL can learn new behaviors for which a reward is
unknown. Thus, the performance of Cheetah and Swimmer
can be evaluated via the hand-crafted environment rewards,
while the Hopper task cannot be evaluated via its hand-
crafted environment reward. For Hopper, the performance
of RbRL will be evaluated based on evaluating the agent’s
behavior when running the learned policies from RbRL.
During the user study, each participant performed two
tests—one for RbRL and one for PbRL—in one of the three
MuJoCo environments, both for n = 2 rating classes. To
eliminate potential bias, we assigned each participant a ran-
domized order in which to perform the PbRL and RbRL ex-
periment runs. Because the participants had no prior knowl-
edge of the MuJoCo environments tested, we provided sam-
ple videos to show desired and undesired behaviors so that
the participants could better understand the task. Upon re-
quest, the participants could also conduct mock tests before
we initiated human data collection. For each experiment run,
the participant was given 30 minutes to give rating/prefer-
ence labels. Once finished, the participant filled out a ques-
tionnaire about the tested algorithm. The participant was
then given a 10 minute break before conducting the second
test and completing the questionnaire about the other algo-
rithm. Afterwards, the participant completed a questionnaire
comparing the two algorithms. The questionnaires can be
found in the Appendix. Policy and reward learning occurred
during the 30 minutes in which the user answered queries,
and then continued after the human stepped away until code
execution reached 4 million environment time-steps.

Setup

We conduct all human experiments by following a similar
setup to Christiano et al. (2017). In particular, our tests were
approved by the UTSA IRB Office, including proper steps
to ensure privacy and informed consent of all participants.
In particular, the goal is to learn to perform a given task
by obtaining feedback from a teacher, in this case a human.
Different from PbRL in Christiano et al. (2017), which asks
humans to provide their preferences between sample pairs,
typically in the form of short video segments, RbRL asks
humans to evaluate individual samples, also in the form of
short video segments, to provide their ratings, e.g., “segment
performance is good” or “segment performance is bad”.
For all human experiments, we trained a reward predictor
by minimizing the cross entropy loss (2) based on the re-
spective batch of data via the computation of (3). We used
the same neural network structures for both the reward pre-
dictor and control policy and the same hyperparameters as
in Christiano et al. (2017).

RbRL with Different Numbers of Rating Classes

To evaluate the impact of the number of rating classes n
on RbRL’s performance, we first conduct tests in which
a human expert (an author on the study) provides ratings
with n = 2, . . . , 8 in the Cheetah MuJoCo environment. In
particular, three experiment runs were conducted for each
n ∈{2, 3, . . . , 8}. Fig. 2 shows the performance of RbRL
for each n. It can be observed that RbRL performs better for
n ∈{3, 4, . . . , 7} than for n ∈{2, 8}, indicating that al-
lowing more rating classes is typically beneficial. However,
an overly large number of rating classes n will lead to dif-
ficulties and inaccuracies in the human ratings, and hence
n must be set to a reasonable value. Indeed, for smaller n,
one can more intuitively assign physical meanings to each
n, whereas for overly large n, it becomes difficult to assign
such physical meanings, and hence it will be more challeng-
ing for users to provide consistent ratings.

3000

2500

Mean Reward

2000

1500

Performance
Figure 3 shows the performance of PbRL
and RbRL across the seven participants for the Cheetah and
Swimmer tasks. We see that RbRL performs similarly to or
better than PbRL. In particular, RbRL can learn quickly in
both cases, evidenced by the fast reward growth early dur-
ing learning. Figure 3 additionally displays results when an
expert (an author on the study) provided ratings and prefer-
ences for Cheetah and Swimmer. For consistency, the same
expert tested PbRL and RbRL in each environment. We ob-
serve that for the expert trials, RbRL performs consistently
better than PbRL given the same human time. These results

1000

500

n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
n = 7
n = 8
0

Figure 2: RbRL performance for different n in a human ex-
periment: performance in the Cheetah environment (mean ±
standard error over 3 experiment runs).

120

100

Mean Reward

80

60

140

40

120

20

100

Mean Reward

Ratings (n=2)
Preferences

0

80

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

60

40

Ratings (n=2)
Preferences
Expert Ratings (n=2)
Expert Preferences

12.5

20

10.0

0

7.5

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

Mean Reward

5.0

2.5

20

0.0

15

2.5

Mean Reward

Ratings (n=2)
Preferences

5.0

10

7.5

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

5

0

Figure 4: RbRL and PbRL performance for the top 3 (non-
expert) user study participants: mean reward ± standard er-
ror over the 3 experiment runs each for Cheetah (top) and
Swimmer (bottom).

Ratings (n=2)
Preferences

Expert Ratings (n=2)
Expert Preferences

5

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

Figure 3: Performance of RbRL and PbRL in the human user
study: Cheetah (top) and Swimmer (bottom). For non-expert
users, the plots show mean ± standard error over 7 users.
The expert results are each over a single experiment run.

of a desired backflip.

User Questionnaire Results
The previous results in this
section focus on evaluating the performance of RbRL and
PbRL via the ground-truth environment reward (Cheetah
and Swimmer) and the learned behavior (Hopper). To un-
derstand how the non-expert users view their experience of
giving rating and preferences, we conduct a post-experiment
user questionnaire, shown in the last section of the Ap-
pendix. The questionnaire asked users for feedback about
their experience supervising PbRL and RbRL and to com-
pare PbRL and RbRL. Figure 5 displays the normalized sur-
vey results from the 20 user study participants. In particu-
lar, the top subfigure of Figure 5 shows the participants’ re-
sponses with respect to their separate opinions about PbRL
and RbRL. These responses suggest that PbRL is more de-
manding and difficult than RbRL, leading users to feel more
insecure and discouraged than when using RbRL. The bot-
tom subfigure of Figure 5 shows the survey responses when
users were asked to compare PbRL and RbRL; these results
confirm the above findings and also show that users per-
ceive themselves as completing the task more successfully
when providing ratings (RbRL). One interesting observa-
tion is that the participants prefer RbRL and PbRL equally,
which differs from the other findings. However, one par-
ticipant stated that he/she preferred PbRL because PbRL is
more challenging, which is counter-intuitive. This suggests

Although RbRL performs similarly to PbRL in the Chee-
tah task, we observed that some participants performed very
poorly in this environment, perhaps due to lack of under-
standing of the task. In the Appendix, the raw data of all
participants for Cheetah and Swimmer is provided to show
performance under each individual participant’s guidance.
From the individual results for Cheetah (RbRL), we can see
that one of the trials performs very poorly (with the final re-
ward less than −10). For all other tests, including both PbRL
and RbRL, the final reward is in positive territory, usually
more than 20. Hence, it may be more meaningful to evalu-
ate the mean results for individuals who perform reasonably.
Figure 4 shows the mean reward for the top 3 non-expert
users at different iterations for Cheetah and Swimmer. It can
be observed that RbRL consistently outperforms PbRL and
learns the goal faster than PbRL.
To compare PbRL and RbRL in the Hopper backflip task,
we ran the learned policies for the 6 participants to gener-
ate videos. Videos for the best learned policies from PbRL
and RbRL can be found at rb.gy/nt1qm6, and indicate that
(1) both RbRL and PbRL can learn the backflip, and (2) the
backflip learned via RbRL fits better with our understanding

421

400

Number of Queries

350

331

292

300

261

Frustration (RbRL)

Frustration (PbRL)

200

153

Difficulty (RbRL)

100

Difficulty (PbRL)

Success (RbRL)

0

Cheetah
Swimmer
Hopper
Total Queries

Success (PbRL)

Mental Demand

(RbRL)

Figure 6: Number of queries provided in 30 minutes in our
human user study (mean ± standard error).

Mental Demand

(PbRL)

Very Low
Neutral
Very High
Response Value

than preferences, especially when queries are not carefully
selected. For environments with large state-action spaces,
ratings can provide more value for reward learning. One lim-
itation of ratings feedback is that the number of data samples
in different rating classes can be very different, leading to
imbalanced datasets. Reward learning in RbRL can be nega-
tively impacted by this data imbalance issue (although our
experiments still show the benefits of RbRL over PbRL).
Hence, on-policy training with a large number of training
steps may not help reward learning in RbRL because the
collected human ratings data can become very unbalanced.
We expect that addressing the data imbalance issue would
further improve RbRL performance.
One challenge for RbRL is that ratings may not be given
consistently during learning, especially considering users’
attention span and fatigue level over time. Future work in-
cludes developing mechanisms to quantify users’ consis-
tency levels, the impact of user inconsistency, or solutions
to user inconsistency. Another potential limitation of RbRL
is that it learns a less refined reward function than PbRL be-
cause RbRL does not seek to distinguish between samples
from the same rating class. Hence, future work could inte-
grate RbRL and PbRL to create a multi-phase learning strat-
egy, where RbRL provides fast initial global learning while
PbRL further refines performance via local queries based on
sample pairs.
One open challenge is the lack of effective human in-
terfaces in existing code bases. For example, in Lee et al.
(2021), only synthetic human feedback is available. Al-
though a human interface is available for the algorithm
in Christiano et al. (2017), the use of Google cloud makes
it difficult to set up and operate efficiently. One of our future
goals is to address this challenge by developing an effec-
tive human interface for reinforcement learning from human
feedback, including preferences, ratings, and their variants.

Preference

Frustration

Difficulty

Success

Mental Demand

RbRL
Neutral
PbRL
Response Value

Figure 5: Participants’ responses to survey questions about
RbRL and PbRL. The set of survey questions is detailed in
the Appendix. The blue bar indicates the median and the
edges depict the 1st quartile (left) and 3rd quartile (right).

Human Time
We also conducted a quantitative analy-
sis of human time effectiveness when humans were asked
to give ratings and preferences. Figure 6 shows the aver-
age number of human queries provided in 30 minutes for
Cheetah, Swimmer, Hopper, and for all three environments
combined. It can be observed that the participants can pro-
vide more ratings than pairwise preferences in all environ-
ments, indicating that it is easier and more efficient to pro-
vide ratings than to provide pairwise preferences. On aver-
age, participants can provide approximately 14.03 ratings
per minute, while they provide only 8.7 preferences per
minute, which means that providing a preference requires
62% more time than providing a rating. For Cheetah, provid-
ing a preference requires 100%+ more time than providing
a rating, which is mainly due to the need to compare video
pairs that are very similar. For Swimmer and Hopper, the
environments and goals are somewhat more complicated.
Hence, providing ratings can be slightly more challenging,
but is still easier than providing pairwise preferences.

Acknowledgements

The authors were supported in part by the Army Research
Lab under grant W911NF2120232, Army Research Office
under grant W911NF2110103, and Office of Naval Research
under grant N000142212474. We thank Feng Tao, Van Ngo,
Gabriella Forbis for their helpful feedback, code, and tests.

Discussion and Open Challenges
One key difference between PbRL and RbRL is the value of
the acquired human data. Because ratings in RbRL are not
relative, they have the potential to provide more global value

Amodei, D.; Olah, C.; Steinhardt, J.; Christiano, P.; Schul-
man, J.; and Man´e, D. 2016. Concrete problems in AI safety.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565.

Bıyık, E.; Losey, D. P.; Palan, M.; Landolfi, N. C.; Shevchuk,
G.; and Sadigh, D. 2022. Learning reward functions from
diverse sources of human feedback: Optimally integrating
demonstrations and preferences. The International Journal
of Robotics Research, 41(1): 45–67.

Bıyık, E.; Palan, M.; Landolfi, N. C.; Losey, D. P.; Sadigh,
D.; et al. 2020. Asking Easy Questions: A User-Friendly Ap-
proach to Active Reward Learning. In Conference on Robot
Learning, 1177–1190.

Bıyık, E.; Talati, A.; and Sadigh, D. 2022. APReL: A library
for active preference-based reward learning algorithms. In
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot In-
teraction (HRI), 613–617.

Brown, D.; Coleman, R.; Srinivasan, R.; and Niekum, S.
2020. Safe imitation learning via fast Bayesian reward in-
ference from preferences. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 1165–1177.

Brown, D.; Goo, W.; Nagarajan, P.; and Niekum, S. 2019.
Extrapolating beyond suboptimal demonstrations via inverse
reinforcement learning from observations. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 783–
792.

Brown, D. S.; Goo, W.; and Niekum, S. 2020. Better-than-
demonstrator imitation learning via automatically-ranked
demonstrations.
In Conference on Robot Learning, 330–
359.

Celemin, C.; and Ruiz-del Solar, J. 2015. COACH: Learning
continuous actions from corrective advice communicated by
humans.
In 2015 International Conference on Advanced
Robotics (ICAR), 581–586.

Choi, J.; and Kim, K.-E. 2011. MAP inference for Bayesian
inverse reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 24.

Choi, J.; and Kim, K.-E. 2012. Nonparametric Bayesian in-
verse reinforcement learning for multiple reward functions.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 25.

Christiano, P. F.; Leike, J.; Brown, T.; Martic, M.; Legg, S.;
and Amodei, D. 2017. Deep reinforcement learning from
human preferences.
Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 30.

Ecoffet, A.; Huizinga, J.; Lehman, J.; Stanley, K. O.; and
Clune, J. 2019.
Go-explore: a new approach for hard-
exploration problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995.

Finn, C.; Levine, S.; and Abbeel, P. 2016. Guided cost learn-
ing: Deep inverse optimal control via policy optimization.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning, 49–58.

Fu, J.; Luo, K.; and Levine, S. 2018. Learning Robust Re-
wards with Adverserial Inverse Reinforcement Learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.

Raw Data for Agent Performance from Individual Participants in the User Study
Figure 7 displays the individual reward curves for non-expert users who participated in the human user study, for the Cheetah
and Swimmer tasks.

120

140

100

120

100

80

Mean Reward

Mean Reward

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

20

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

(b) Individual results for Cheetah (RbRL with n = 2)

(a) Individual results for Cheetah (PbRL)

20

15

15

10

Mean Reward

10

Mean Reward

5

5

0

0

5

5

10

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

0
800k
1.6e6
2.4e6
3.2e6
4e6
Timesteps

(d) Individual results for Swimmer (RbRL with n = 2)

(c) Individual results for Swimmer (PbRL)

Figure 7: Results of individual runs in the human user study for the Cheetah and Swimmer environments (7 users in each case).

Class i = 0
Class i = 1
Class i = 2

Class i = 3
Class i = 4

0.8

Class probability Q (i)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

R0 = 0
R1 = 0.2
R2 = 0.4
R3 = 0.6
R4 = 0.8
R5 = 1

Normalized reward R( )

Figure 8: RbRL’s modeled class probabilities Qσ(i). This figure illustrates Equation (3), evaluated with n = 5 classes, k =
30, and the rating category separation parameters hard-coded at {0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1}. We can see that the probability of
belonging to a class i is maximized when the normalized return ˜R(σ) is halfway between ¯Ri and ¯Ri+1, and decreases as ˜R(σ)
moves further from this point.

Questionnaire
The three-part questionnaire given to the user study participants appears next.

User Study Questionnaire

Instructions: Mark the bin best reflecting your response when instructed to do so.



Rating-based feedback:

1. How mentally demanding was the task?

Very low Neutral Very high

2. How successful were you in accomplishing what you were asked to do?

Very low Neutral Very high

3. How hard did you have to work to accomplish your level of performance?

Very low Neutral Very high

4. How insecure, discouraged, irritated, stressed, and annoyed were you?

Very low Neutral Very high

User Study Questionnaire

Instructions: Mark the bin best reflecting your response when instructed to do so.



Preference-based feedback:

1. How mentally demanding was the task?

Very low Neutral Very high

2. How successful were you in accomplishing what you were asked to do?

Very low Neutral Very high

3. How hard did you have to work to accomplish your level of performance?

Very low Neutral Very high

4. How insecure, discouraged, irritated, stressed, and annoyed were you?

Very low Neutral Very high

User Study Questionnaire

Instructions: Mark the bin best reflecting your response when instructed to do so.


Comparison of preference-based and ratings-based feedback:

1. Which was more mentally demanding?

Ratings Neutral Preferences

2. With which were you able to better accomplish the task?

Ratings Neutral Preferences

3. With which was it more difficult to accomplish the task?

Ratings Neutral Preferences

4. Which caused you to be more insecure, discouraged, irritated, stressed, and annoyed?

Ratings Neutral Preferences

5. Which did you like more?

Ratings Neutral Preferences