An Exploratory Study of V-Model in Building ML-Enabled
Software: A Systems Engineering Perspective

Jie JW Wu
∗

ABSTRACT

face additional challenges in the process [26, 40, 62, 67], data qual-
ity [43, 57, 58, 60], technical debts [61], testing [12, 29, 52, 77], secu-
rity & privacy [28, 37, 42, 74], safety [10, 55, 56, 76], and collabora-
tions [45], etc. Although the challenges and solutions of developing
ML components have garnered considerable interest, such as engi-
neering challenges [64], testing [12], and automating development
processes of ML components [12], few studies have mentioned the
interdisciplinary collaboration challenges [44, 45] at system level
for building product with ML components, including communica-
tion, documentation, engineering, and process [26, 40, 62, 67]. In
this work, we approach these challenges from a software process
perspective.
Among the collaboration challenges, ML challenges the tradi-
tional software process lifecycle [13] due to its experimental and
iterative nature. On one hand, with the introduction of ML into
more and more impactful and critical software applications, collab-
oration problems start to emerge and be reported [44, 45], such as
a lack of a standard process, unclear responsibility, and lack of a
system-wide view, etc. On the other hand, the traditional software
process lifecycle models such as waterfall, spiral, or agile models
do not seem to fit well for ML-enabled system due to its different
process compared with traditional software system [49]. However,
very few studies have explored new process models to systemati-
cally reduce the complexity, uncertainty, and risks of the software
lifecycle for ML-enabled systems. The goal of this paper is to ad-
dress this research question: How can software process life cycles be
established to address the interdisciplinary collaboration challenges
from ML-enabled systems?
Systems Engineering (SE1) processes and principles provide a
rigorous standard for large-scale projects with the goal of reduc-
ing complexity and risks [8, 9, 38, 54]. Systems Engineering, an
interdisciplinary field of engineering and engineering management,
leverages system thinking principles to center on the problem of
how to specify, design, integrate, and deliver successful complex
systems over their life cycles [73]. The V-Model, originated in 1993
by [14] and commonly used in Systems Engineering processes [5],
is an interdisciplinary, rigorous approach that starts from customer
needs and requirements, then proceeds with design synthesis and
system validation from system-level to sub-system level to com-
ponent level, while taking care of problems such as performance,
tests, and risks, etc. At its heart, “V” stands for decomposition on
one thigh and integration on the other thigh, with continuous val-
idation and verification (V&V), as shown in Figure 1. Motivated
by the experience, interviews, and reflections of practitioners, we
argue that the V-Model for Systems Engineering process, due to
its interdisciplinary, system-wide, quality-focus nature, provides
a way to address the literature gap in collaboration challenges in
building ML-enabled software. Therefore, we consider the Systems

Machine learning (ML) components are being added to more and
more critical and impactful software systems, but the software
development process of real-world production systems from proto-
typed ML models remains challenging with additional complexity
and interdisciplinary collaboration challenges. This poses difficul-
ties in using traditional software lifecycle models such as waterfall,
spiral, or agile models when building ML-enabled systems. In this
research, we apply a Systems Engineering lens to investigate the
use of V-Model in addressing the interdisciplinary collaboration
challenges when building ML-enabled systems. By interviewing
practitioners from software companies, we established a set of 8
propositions for using V-Model to manage interdisciplinary col-
laborations when building products with ML components. Based
on the propositions, we found that despite requiring additional
efforts, the characteristics of V-Model align effectively with sev-
eral collaboration challenges encountered by practitioners when
building ML-enabled systems. We recommend future research to
investigate new process models, frameworks and tools that leverage
the characteristics of V-Model such as the system decomposition,
clear system boundary, and consistency of Validation & Verification
(V&V) for building ML-enabled systems.

arXiv:2308.05381v4 [cs.SE] 5 May 2024

ACM Reference Format:
Jie JW Wu
. 2024. An Exploratory Study of V-Model in Building ML-
Enabled Software: A Systems Engineering Perspective. In Conference on
AI Engineering Software Engineering for AI (CAIN 2024), April 14–15, 2024,
Lisbon, Portugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
1145/3644815.3644951

1
INTRODUCTION

Machine learning (ML) has been introduced to many software ap-
plications and has led to massive success [59]. However, it has
been recognized that going from prototyped ML models to real-
world production systems is challenging [1, 2, 11, 64]. Therefore,
compared with traditional software systems, ML-enabled systems

∗The author did this work after completing his PhD from George Washington Univer-
sity, before joining as a postdoc at the University of British Columbia, so there is no
affiliated institution for this work.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from
CAIN 2024, April 14–15, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0591-5/24/04...$15.00

1SE stands for Systems Engineering rather than Software Engineering in this paper

Figure 1: V-Model [69] in the context of building ML-enabled systems

Engineering process as a suitable lens to address our research ques-
tion.
In this research, by interviewing practitioners from multiple
software companies, we investigated the application of V-Model
to address collaboration challenges in building ML-enabled sys-
tems. We analyzed the empirical evidence from the practitioners
and derived a set of 8 propositions for using V-Model in building
products with ML components. Our study had 11 participants who
are professional software developers, ML scientists, and technical
leaders. In the interviews, collaboration challenges were discussed
for building ML-enabled systems, and then the use of V-Model in
these situations was discussed. Our results from the propositions
indicate that the V-Model takes additional efforts to follow, but
they align well with the collaboration challenges encountered by
practitioners when building ML-enabled applications.

introduction of ML components, these different roles, such as soft-
ware engineer, ML scientist, technical leader, need to collaborate,
and there are very few studies to address the challenges arising in
these types of collaboration [45]. Regarding the lifecycle models for
ML-enabled systems, ML lifecycle models such as CRISP-DM [40]
and Team Data Science Process (TDSP) [19] were studied in the
Fintech domain, with findings that ML lifecycle models need to be
revised with more research [26]. In particular, these ML lifecycle
models missed several necessary steps, including documentation,
model evaluation, model monitoring, etc. Study that explored how
teams develop, deploy and maintain software systems with ML
components was conducted and summarized into best practices for
improving software development processes [62]. In this work, we
attempt to address the collaboration problem from the perspective
of a more interdisciplinary-focused process model.

2
BACKGROUND
2.1
Software Engineering with ML Components

2.2
Systems Engineering Process and Principles

Systems Engineering is a discipline closely related to Software Engi-
neering. The former is focused on high-criticality and safety-critical
systems. The latter is rapidly growing with more new method-
ologies and tools due to the flexible and malleable nature of soft-
ware. Systems Engineering is a "full life cycle" engineering dis-
cipline that is responsible for starting and performing an inter-
disciplinary process to meet stakeholders’ needs, reduce system
complexity with high quality, well-defined schedule, and trustwor-
thiness [5, 9, 27, 41]. The primary target of Systems Engineering
process is the system that is complex and requires the expertise
of different engineering disciplines. The goal is to reduce the sys-
tem complexity, the risk of failures, cost overrun, and development
time [6, 21, 32, 71]. The hierarchy of the elements goes from system,
to subsystem, to components, and to parts. Given the additional
complexity and interdisciplinary collaboration that machine learn-
ing brings in, our motivation in this work is to investigate applying
the V-Model from SE process to ML-enabled systems to address the
challenges that have been raised [44, 45, 48].
From the software development lifecycle (SDLC) model perspec-
tive, different lifecycle models have different ways of balancing

We have seen an increasingly wide adoption of machine learning
models in more and more critical and influential systems. Compared
with traditional software products, building products with machine
learning components is more science-like, uncertain, and probabilis-
tic [66]. This poses new challenges for traditional software lifecycle
models [26, 40, 62, 67]. Besides, a number of studies have discussed
how to build better ML pipelines to train and deploy ML models,
and new concepts are created, such as "MLOps" [39, 62]. However,
few studies focus on the system-wide process model that can better
assist different roles such as developer, ML scientist, and leaders to
work together with different components (ML, non-ML, data, infra).
In this work, we explore the potential of finding a more suitable
process model for building system-wide products with different
roles and with both ML and non-ML components.
From the expertise perspective, ML-enabled systems impose
expertise in a number of domains including data science, data qual-
ity [43, 57, 58, 60], testing [12, 29, 52, 77], security & privacy [28,
37, 42, 74], safety [10, 55, 56, 76]. These expertises come from dif-
ferent roles with different backgrounds and skill sets. Due to the

Table 1: Comparison of lifecycle models on several dimen-
sions [16, 24, 41] in software and systems engineering.

to develop propositions by using induction from observations [7].
We briefly describe the interview and analysis procedure as follows.

3.2
Participants

Interviews were conducted with 11 participants, coming from 9
companies. The participants were hired from the author’s two-
hop connections in the software industry. Four of them work at
Big Tech companies. The rest seven of them worked at mid-sized
tech companies. Four of them had experience as ML scientists, and
the rest mainly worked as software developers. Four of them had
additional experience in technical leadership and management. All
of them had more than 4 years of professional experience as either
ML scientists or software developers. Their team had worked on at
least one machine learning-based project.

3.3
Interview Protocol

We developed a semi-structured interview protocol as the interview
guide, which includes a set of challenges and collaboration problems
in the existing literature for ML-enabled systems [44, 45]. The
interview guides were sent to the interviewees ahead of time to
give enough time for them to prepare the answers. Each interview
took between 60 and 120 minutes, as some participants provided
more details in some questions due to their practical experience
and reflective insights in these questions.

when and how to design interfaces. Table 1 summarizes different
mainstream lifecycle models with their advantages and disadvan-
tages [4, 41]. In Table 1, the Waterfall model has a rigorously struc-
tured plan but with low variability. The Agile model, widely used
in today’s software development, focuses more on customer needs
and "Speed to market" of features but is unstructured and poses
challenges for complex systems such as ML-enabled systems [4, 41].
The Spiral model prioritizes iterative development and deployment
for incremental delivery but has the risk of instability caused by
changing requirements and also challenges with complex systems.
Compared with Agile, Spiral, and Waterfall models, V-Model has
disadvantages in "Speed to Market" and "Requirement Variability"
given its limited flexibility [4, 41], but has advantages in "System
Boundary" [24], "System Validation & Verification" [16] for sys-
tems with high complexity such as ML-enabled systems. In this
context, our research to investigate V-Model is about finding a
proper balance for ML-enabled systems between the complexity,
boundary, consistency, and criticality of systems, speed to market,
and requirement variability. There have been recent research works
that study the integration of SDLC models for machine learning
applications [33, 50, 51], our work is different in that we mainly
address the gap of collaboration challenges by developing a set of
propositions through the use of V-Model.

3.4
Data Analysis

We used framework analysis [53] due to the involvement of pro-
fessional practitioners. The framework analysis includes five key
stages: 1) familiarization, 2) identifying a thematic framework, 3)
indexing (participants were assigned to P1-P11), 4) charting, 5)
mapping and interpretation [53]. We started the analysis after each
interview was completed. This ensured we made small changes to
the next interviews according to the valuable feedback from each
interview. After the interviews were completed, for some ques-
tions that hadn’t reached a consensus, we followed up with the
interviewees to further discuss and validate our updated findings.
Interviewees replied with comments and some additional findings.

3.5
Threats of Validity

Typical threats from qualitative research work also exist in this
work. For example, the collected data may be different in compa-
nies with specialized applications, or geographic locations. The
questions asked in the interview cannot possibly cover all chal-
lenges in ML-enabled systems. We mostly only interviewed one
person for each company, which may be biased. No roles were
interviewed outside the role of developer and scientist, except that
only a small number of participants have leadership/management
roles. The biases of authors in selecting the participants and other
decisions in the interview protocol may affect the results, although
we tried our best to follow the standards.

3
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
3.1
Research Design Summary

The goal of the research is to explore the use of V-Model for build-
ing ML-enabled systems. Thus, we used an explanatory approach to
develop a set of research propositions. The reasons we chose this ap-
proach are as follows: first, there are very few studies on the process
lifecycle models for ML-enabled systems. Second, there is no prior
knowledge of the application of V-Model to ML-enabled systems.
Third, this approach is qualitative and thus provides a testable way

4
V-MODEL CONCEPT FOR BUILDING
ML-ENABLED SYSTEMS

In this section, we describe the concept of Systems Engineering
V-Model and put V-Model in the context of building ML-enabled

Figure 2: 11 SE functions [5] in the context of building ML-enabled systems

systems. In a nutshell, the formula of Systems Engineering is

Pre-Phase A, concept exploration and opportunity/benefit analysis
are performed during the project planning to generate candidate
ideas and select the project based on the opportunity sizing data
or stakeholders’ needs. In Phase A, how the system operates to
achieve stakeholders’ needs is described. In Phase B, requirements
at the system level are created, followed by the high-level design
for the system and the sub-system requirements in Phase C. Note
that in ML development, Phase B and Phase C could be merged
into a single Phase if there is no need to distinguish system and
sub-system. Phase D is the detailed design at the component level
for ML, non-ML, data, infra components, etc.
On the right leg, Phase E is building up components and sub-
systems to form the system, with a focus on testing at both the
component level and system level, where the issue of unclear re-
sponsibility for system-level testing is stated by both literature [45]
and practitioners. Finally, Phase F explicitly calls out the system
retirement, replacement, or cleanup, which is reported by practi-
tioners to be missing for several ML-based projects.

SE = Vee + 11 SE Functions + Tools,
(1)

in which the 11 SE functions are summarized in [5]. Following the
notation in [5], the 11 SE functions are donated as SE1-SE11 in
later sections, and Vee is donated as V in the propositions of the
result section. We changed some of the original terminologies in
the V-Model to better adapt to the context of ML Engineering. We
describe Vee and 11 SE functions in detail below.

4.1
Vee Chart

Definition. Figure 1 shows the Vee chart and its context for build-
ing ML-enabled systems. As shown in Figure 1, the Vee chart is the
core construct of the V-Model. The Vee chart is composed of the
following phases [15]:

• Pre-Phase A: Concept Exploration and Benefit Analysis
• Phase A: Concept Development (System level)
• Phase B: System Requirements (System level)
• Phase C: High-Level Design and Sub-system Requirements
(Subsystem level)
• Phase D: Detailed Design (Component level)
• Phase E: Verification & Validation, Operations and Mainte-
nance, Changes & Upgrades
• Phase F: System Retirement / Replacement / Cleanup

4.2
11 SE Functions

For each Phase of the Vee chart, 11 SE functions are applied to
achieve its goals. Table 2 displays the original names and detailed
definitions of the 11 SE functions. For each of the 11 SE functions,
we describe and discuss the connection to ML Engineering below.
Note that for each SE, if there is a modification in terminology due to
adaptation to ML engineering, we include the original terminology
within brackets. The 11 SE functions and their context for building
ML-enabled systems are visually illustrated in Figure 2.

At a high level, in each phase of the Vee chart on the left leg, we
apply 11 SE functions, to achieve the objectives. From the process
perspective, given the target system or project of interest, this
process first follows the left leg downwards, and then follows the
right leg upwards, to finish each phase in order. The left leg is
focused on formulation, with the goal of decomposing the system
into subsystems and components and finishing the design. The
right leg is focused on implementation, with the goal of integrating
the system from the component level with verifications. Note that
Pre-Phase A and Phase F are not explicitly shown in Figure 1.
Connection to ML Engineering. One appealing feature of the
Vee chart is the clear system boundary and responsibility between
the system, subsystem, and components. We will show later that
this addresses several challenges as mentioned by practitioners’
evidence and propositions. Specifically, following the left leg, in

4.2.1
SE1: Objectives (Mission Objectives and Constraints).

SE1 refers to the objectives or goals in the context of ML Engi-
neering. A similar mapping of SE1 in the software management
process is Objectives and Key Results (OKR) [47], a goal-setting
method commonly used in software companies to set measurable
goals.

4.2.2
SE2: Derived Requirements Development.

SE2 is about requirement analysis that converts the user scenar-
ios and stakeholder objectives into requirements. Categorization of

Table 2: 11 Systems Engineering functions, with original function names, adapted names in the context of ML Engineering, and
their brief descriptions [5]

Identifier
Original SE Function
Name
Adapted Name for
ML Engineering
Description

SE1
Mission Objectives and
Constraints
Objectives
Statements describing the goals and constraints of the (mission)
objectives

SE2
Derived Requirements
Development
Derived Requirements
Development
Concise statements outlining 1) what to achieve, 2) how the
desired level of achievement, and 3) any associated constraints
or limitations.

SE3
Architectural
Design
Development
Architectural
Design
Development
Explanation of elements and interfaces, with detailed analysis
for assessing the performance

SE4
Concept of Operation
(“ConOps”)
User Scenarios and Ra-
tionale
Explanation of how the system operates under the (mission)
objectives to align with stakeholder expectations

SE5
Validate and Verify
Validate and Verify
An ongoing SE function, ensuring consistency in requirements,
ConOps, and architectural design during formulation, while
also planning and executing tests under a verification plan

SE6
Interfaces and ICD (In-
terface Control Docu-
ment)

Documented Interfaces
Descriptions and documentations of interfaces, boundaries be-
tween elements, that evolve as the architectural design with
requirements outlined.

SE7
Mission Environment
External Events
Descriptions and documentations of external environmental
concerns and exposures

SE8
Technical
Resource
Budget Tracking
Resource Tracking
Tracking and identification of resource budgets

SE9
Risk Management
Risk Management
Negative occurrences and their potential unfavorable impacts
on the project

SE10
Configuration Manage-
ment and Documenta-
tion

Documentation and Ap-
proval
A system for documentation control, access, approval and dis-
semination

SE11
System Milestone Re-
views and Reports
Milestone Reviews and
Reports
Reviews that communicate to stakeholders with significant
project events, decision points, and achievements, etc.

requirements includes functional, performance, verification, and
interface requirements. Each level has a separate set of require-
ments for that level (system, subsystem, component level). Based
on practitioners’ evidence, having requirements at the system level
and component level would help address the challenge points in
requirement engineering and model development, as illustrated in
the reasoning of propositions PR1, PR4.

4.2.4
SE4: User Scenarios and Rationale (Concept of Operation).

SE4 mainly corresponds to the role of the product manager and
designer. It is about how the system will be used from the end-user
and customer perspectives. It represents the customer needs that
lead to system requirements. One practitioner had experienced
that when working on an ML-based project, the software engineer
was focused totally on the interaction and development of ML,
infra, and data components on the server side, but missed a small
improvement on the UI side, which later turned out to be very
impactful from the user engagement perspective (P1). So this part
of the process is essential.

4.2.3
SE3: Architectural Design Development.

SE3 captures the architectural design that describes the elements,
interfaces, and expected performance based on requirements. Ac-
cording to the practitioners, given the complexity of the ML com-
ponent, it is especially important to pay closer attention to the
interfaces of the ML components to other components and other
systems/subsystems. Meanwhile, it’s also critical to have design at
the system level to avoid potential system-wide issues caused by
ML components, as mentioned in proposition PR2.

4.2.5
SE5: Validate and Verify.

SE5 captures the Verification & Validation (V&V) between re-
quirements, architectural design, and user scenarios, at both the
design synthesis stage (left leg of Vee) and system validation stage
(right leg of Vee). Verification is "assuring that the system is built
right" [20]. Validation is "assuring that the right system is built" [20].

On the left leg side, V&V is a function to ensure that the design,
requirements, and user scenarios are consistent with each other.
On the right leg side, V&V makes sure that testing is executed at
the system, subsystem, and component level, which is reported
as an unclear responsibility. Most practitioners mentioned that in
data-driven organizations, system validation refers to the validation
of the impact of ML-based projects on moving the key metrics. This
is typically done via online evaluations such as A/B testing to make
data-driven decisions [75]. Practitioners agreed that testing and
online evaluation as V&V are critical (proposition PR6). Besides
testing and online evaluation, some practitioners reported incon-
sistency between artifacts or understanding of design synthesis
and actual implementation (P1,P2), which can be also addressed via
V&V.

interviews with the practitioners (proposition PR3). With the risk
management in the project process, any risk in the ML-enabled
system would be first identified, and then evaluated. Finally, the
corresponding method will be developed as mitigation to the risk.

4.2.10
SE10: Documentation and Approval (Configuration Manage-
ment and Documentation).

SE10 refers to the documentation control, access, and approval.
According to the practitioners, having documentation at different
levels, and keeping them up-to-date is helpful, although it needs
a certain amount of work (proposition PR8). As also mentioned
in the existing literature [26, 44, 45], more research is needed in
documentation to ensure a good trade-off is obtained between
efforts on documentation and its benefits.

4.2.6
SE6: Documented Interfaces (Interfaces and Interface Control
Document).

4.2.11
SE11: Milestone Reviews and Reports.

SE11 captures the reviews and artifacts in several critical mile-
stones of the ML-based project. Most practitioners acknowledged
the importance of design review, as it provides a way to communi-
cate with both the external and internal stakeholders and collect
important feedback on the design.

SE6 refers to the documented interfaces in the design. They can
be either internal or external interfaces. Since the interface is a key
factor for better collaboration, the definition of interfaces should
be a focus of the entire process. One practitioner mentioned that
having a clear contract (or interface) with other components and
other roles is very important when working on ML-based com-
plex projects (P8). Interfaces of components such as data and infra
should be especially emphasized, as mentioned in proposition PR5.
Once there is any change on either internal or external interfaces
that leads to project delays, we should actively update the related
artifacts and schedule in the project process.

5
RESULTS ON CHALLENGE POINTS

The challenge points of ML-enabled systems are discussed in the
interviews with the practitioners from software companies. Most
of these challenges are concerned with interdisciplinary collabora-
tion challenges. For each area, we briefly mentioned the challenges
from the existing literature and then discussed the related empiri-
cal evidence from the practitioners. For the literature, we mainly
followed [44, 45] that provided a comprehensive summary and anal-
ysis of the challenges. Finally, we derived a set of propositions (PR
for short) regarding how the process should be enacted from the
perspective of the Systems Engineering process.

4.2.7
SE7: External Events (Mission Environment).

SE7 captures any external event at the organization level or
team level that affects the project’s progress. One practitioner had
experienced that the feature launches and feature work were paused
due to a team-wide investigation on metrics (P1). Another example
is that the design is changed to add a constraint on the cost budget
due to an external event of company-wide cost tracking. Several
practitioners also mentioned that urgent investigations and on-
call issues required non-trivial efforts and analysis since the ML
complexity had an impact on their ongoing projects.

5.1
Requirement Engineering

5.1.1
Challenges in Literature. The existing literature mentioned
challenges in requirements such as vague specifications in ML
problems and unrealistic expectations from managers and other
team members due to a lack of AI competence [44]. The vague-
ness in ML problem specifications refers to the difficulty in map-
ping between the high-level business goals and low-level require-
ments of the ML model, and measuring the contributions of the ML
model [26, 44]. The unrealistic expectations exist in the customers,
and team members: the customers’ view of model development is
static, and team members had difficulties in defining and scoping
the projects [44, 46].

4.2.8
SE8: Resource Tracking (Technical Resource Budget Tracking).

SE8 refers to any resource tracking for the current project or
ML-enabled systems. In the interviews, for ML-enabled projects,
the cost of the existing jobs and services is one of the commonly
mentioned resources. Another resource is the number of machines
one can use for running model training jobs or data-related jobs.
Regarding any pain point, one practitioner reported the uncertainty
of infra jobs and ML model training jobs that caused periodic cost
investigation in their team (P1).

5.1.2
Discussions from Practitioners. For vagueness of ML specifi-
cations, a number of practitioners acknowledged that due to the
experimental nature of ML models, it’s nearly impossible to map the
changes in ML components directly and accurately to changes in
terms of business metrics or performance metrics (P1,P6,P8,P9,P10).
Some practitioners from big tech companies mentioned that in their
design reviews before implementation, they typically would list
the requirements to provide an estimate of the change in business
metrics or performance metrics (P1,P8,P9). In this way, support

4.2.9
SE9: Risk Management.

SE9 captures any changes and the corresponding risks in the
process such as requirement change or design change. Due to the
uncertainty and complexity of the ML model, this is not uncom-
mon and in part caused several challenge points according to our

from the infra side can be planned and discussed if the change will
cause relatively big regressions on performance metrics such as
latency or Queries per second (QPS). Some practitioners reported
that they lack such type of requirements in their projects (P2,P3,P4).
For instance, one practitioner shared that "at first, we just wanted to
run the ML model when users enter the full sentence and click SAVE,
but we found the ML model had very good results, so we changed the
requirement to run the model each time when the user adds a new
word. This significantly increased the QPS at launch time, and several
engineers and on-calls were pulled in to investigate this urgent issue
until it was resolved." (P2) This caused the operational on-call issue
that the QPS of the ML model was unexpectedly high during the
first day of launch. The practitioner agreed that this problem could
be avoided if the functional requirements and technical solutions of
different alternatives had been created and reviewed in the design
doc.
As for the unrealistic expectations, one practitioner mentioned
that their leaders did not have a detailed level of understanding
of ML and AI (P5). This has caused unrealistic expectations from
them on the quarterly metric goal that can be driven by ML models.
To set the right expectation, the engineers educated the leaders by
giving a number of concrete examples to demonstrate the upper
limit of how ML can help with the ranking problem in their team.
Overall, most practitioners agreed that listing the requirements
at the system level for ML-based projects helps to avoid potential
issues and unrealistic expectations of requirements. This evidence
led to the following proposition:

group, there is no issue of such a transition, although one practi-
tioner argued it’s a "heavy responsibility" that many different things
with different contexts are done by one person.
In the other group, software developers collaborate closely with
ML engineers to deliver ML-based projects. For this group, chal-
lenges of the transition do exist as reported in the interviews. Sev-
eral practitioners had the experience that after the ML model was
developed and evaluated by an ML engineer, the ML model was
put in production, and issues such as regressions in performance
metrics such as latency, and infra problems caused by QPS increase
were later identified (P1,P2,P8,P9). Additional resources from soft-
ware engineers or infra engineers were pulled into investigating
these issues.
The practitioners mostly agreed that having a well-thought-out
architecture design at the system level with clear interfaces, respon-
sibilities, alternatives, and estimated performance helps alleviate
the transition issues. Some practitioners argued that although pro-
viding an estimate generally helps, it’s very difficult or unrealistic
to have an accurate estimate during the design. There are many
assumptions in the design phase, so how the ML model impacts
the business and performance metrics can only be known when it’s
implemented and tested in production. In such cases of unexpected
changes, as part of risk management (SE9), it’s also helpful to update
the design, any artifact, and planning as mitigation to avoid out-
dated information, which sometimes happens and misleads other
team members. This evidence led to the following two propositions:

PR2: System-level architecture design with elements, inter-
faces, responsibilities, alternatives, and expected performances
should be created and actively maintained to keep up-to-date
with new changes, with the participation of the owners of ML
components and non-ML components. (V, SE3, SE5)

PR1: System-level requirements should be created and actively
maintained to keep up-to-date with new requirement changes,
with the participation of the owners of ML components and
non-ML components. (V, SE2, SE5, SE9)

5.1.3
Contributions of the V-Model. System system-wide view is
often lacking when building products with ML components [45].
The V-Model brings in clear system boundaries and responsibility
between systems, subsystems, and components. This leads to the
necessity of requirements at the system(or subsystem)-level in PR1.
Besides, the risk management (SE9) and V&V (SE5) of V-Model
ensure the requirements in PR1 are actively maintained and up-to-
date. This can be easily missed and cause issues when uncertainty
and complexity are high in building ML-enabled systems.

PR3: Risks such as design changes or improvements due to
uncertainty in ML components must be actively identified and
mitigated. (SE5, SE9)

5.2.3
Contributions of the V-Model. Similar to requirement en-
gineering, the V-Model brings in 1) clear system boundary and
responsibility, and 2) enforcement of V&V, risk management that
facilitates PR2 and PR3 in the context of building ML-enabled sys-
tems with high uncertainty and complexity. However, for PR3,
one limitation of V-Model is its limited agility and adaptability
to changes [4], as pointed out in Table 1. As ML development is
iterative and experimental in nature, if there is any change during
the project, all the related documentation will have to be updated
to the new change, leading to a slow top-down process. More fu-
ture research is needed to address the rigid and inflexible nature
of the V-Model to be adopted in organizations for iterative ML
development.

5.2
Architecture, Design, and Implementation

5.2.1
Challenges in Literature. In terms of architecture, design,
and implementation, the literature highlighted the difficulty of
the transition from model-centric to system-wide view in produc-
tion [44, 45]. Meanwhile, several studies reported the delay in plan-
ning and monitoring of change [2, 3, 34, 44, 45]. From software
design and architecture perspective, studies have found additional
complexity in system design for incorporating ML models, typically
caused by dependencies, and entanglements [18, 34, 35, 44].

5.3
Model Development

5.2.2
Discussions from Practitioners. Let us categorize the practi-
tioners into two groups: in the first group, the practitioner does
both the ML role at the ML model level and the software developer
role at the product level as a single engineer. Therefore, for this

5.3.1
Challenges in Literature. In model development, the existing
literature reported the conflicts in code quality due to a lack of
standardized code quality in model development tools [44, 65, 70],
and limited infrastructure and technical support [3, 44].

5.3.2
Discussions from Practitioners. For model development, sev-
eral practitioners agreed on the low code quality of ML engineers
given their educational backgrounds are more on science and sta-
tistics [31, 45]. For example, P6 shared that "SDEs (Software De-
velopment Engineers) are more emphasized on the coding standards.
Scientists are more focused on model accuracy and are less focused on
coding standards and code comments, class interface definitions, etc.
It’s a problem for scientists that how to improve their coding standard
in ML model development, and who will own and maintain the code
of the model." For this issue, the practitioner agreed that it would be
better if the requirements of coding standards at the ML component
level were directly called out to get the corresponding resources.
Some practitioners also called out the issues encountered by ML
scientists on the dependency of data pipelines and infrastructure.
For the dependency of data pipelines, P5 shared that "to train a new
ML model, we need to backfill the data in the past few weeks to be
used in training, and it requires non-trivial work and is burdensome".
No or limited infrastructure support on some infra-level errors in
the data pipeline was also called out to be challenging points (P9).
For these issues, practitioners agreed that it makes sense to call out
these requirements to the organization or leadership level, but in
practice, very few supports were actually given to address them.
The above evidence led to the following proposition:

also mentioned the model dataset is very important and it’s better
to make an investment to automate them rather than do much
manual work to generate these datasets (P10). Another practitioner
mentioned the difficulty of data labeling that was done manually
via human evaluation (P8). The practitioners agreed that data as a
component is a pain point that needs to be emphasized with thor-
ough requirements, validation, and monitoring. This evidence led
to the following proposition:

PR5: Besides ML components and non-ML components, data
should be a separate component with standalone requirements
(data requirements), design synthesis, and system validation
(data validation and data monitoring). Optionally, the same
applies to infra as a separate component. (SE2, SE3, SE4, SE5,
SE9)

5.4.3
Contributions of the V-Model. Despite the complexity and
iterative nature of data or infra issues, the clear boundary and
responsibility of the V-Model between systems, subsystems, and
components ensure the enforcement of requirements and design
for data or infra components. The risk management (SE9) together
with V&V (SE5) also plays a role in mitigation when data or infra
components have uncertainty.

5.5
Quality Assurance

PR4: Requirements and detailed design of ML components with
interfaces, alternatives, and expected performances should be
created, with the participation of the owners of external and
internal components such as data, and infrastructure. (V, SE2,
SE3, SE4)

5.5.1
Challenges in Literature. In the existing literature, ML model
teams assumed no responsibility for testing the product beyond
creating a model from an accuracy perspective, while product teams
in several organizations also did not have planned testing at the
system level [36, 44, 45].

5.3.3
Contributions of the V-Model. Due to the difference in skills
and backgrounds of ML engineers, combined with issues in ML com-
ponent dependency, certain aspects of ML components are missing
in terms of requirements and design. The system boundary and
responsibility of V-Model ensures that this information is created
and reviewed by the internal and external owners.

5.5.2
Discussions from Practitioners. Practitioners generally agreed
on the importance and the need for testing at the system level using
methods such as online monitoring metrics, load testing, and A/B
testing. Some practitioners had experience handling a ticket hard
to investigate: "it’s not clear if the root cause of the ticket is in the
ML component or non-ML component." (P1,P2). Practitioners agreed
that it would help a lot if there were metrics, monitoring, or tools
on ML and non-ML components to distinguish whether the issue
is from the ML model or not.
One practitioner had multiple experiences with identifying noisy
metrics during A/B testing, an issue difficult to address from the ex-
periment platform infra (P5). Another difficulty in testing reported
by practitioners is on multiple iterations of A/B testing (P1, P8).
This is due to several reasons: first, the system is too complex, and
the earlier assumptions on performance and business metrics are
wrong. The black box of the ML model is another reason for causing
multiple iterations of tuning parameters. A third reason is the gap
between offline model evaluation and online testing reported by
multiple practitioners (P1, P5, P6, P9). To address this, practitioners
stated that after the model is launched, they would usually add a
holdout experiment (P5), or add metrics to do some continuous
monitoring (P8), or so-called "acceptance test" to check if there is
any gap between online tests in the product and offline tests in
the ML model (P6, P9). One practitioner observed unclear responsi-
bility for system-level testing between ML scientists and software
engineers (P6). The above evidence led to the following proposition:

5.4
Data Engineering

5.4.1
Challenges in Literature. The existing literature pointed out
several issues on the data side, including difficulty in ensuring data
quality and data understanding from domain experts, lack of tool
support for monitoring and detecting data evolution [22, 25, 44, 68,
72].

5.4.2
Discussions from Practitioners. Some of these issues were
also reported by practitioners. One practitioner had experienced
that engineers had to do multiple iterations to fix several data is-
sues and finally get the correct data they needed for model training.
Unless the engineer has very deep ML experience and expertise, it
was very difficult for the engineer to get it right in the first iteration
given the complexity of these data issues. One practitioner stated
in their ChatGPT-based project that the quality of data (team’s wiki
documents) was so low that the ChatGPT output using the low-
quality data turned out to work poorly (P3). The data quality may
be improved by asking data engineers to do some data cleaning,
but the best way is to get help from domain experts to manually
edit the data, which requires much more effort. One practitioner

design, operations, etc [30, 44, 45, 63]. Some studies pointed out
that poor documentation is one of the reasons for such collabo-
ration challenges since various decisions in ML-enabled systems
cannot be understood if not documented [26, 39, 44]. Other works
found additional complexities in the documentation for ML engi-
neering [17, 44].

PR6: Verification & Validation (V&V) at both system, subsys-
tem level, and component level (ML, non-ML, data, and infra),
such as testing and monitoring metrics, should be enforced
with identified owners. (V, SE5)

5.5.3
Contributions of the V-Model. V&V (SE5) of V-Model enforce
the consistency at system level, subsystem level, and component
level. This consistency at the system and component level becomes
important in discovering potential issues for quality assurance
when different components (such as ML, data, and infra) are more
unreliable when building ML-enabled systems.

5.7.2
Discussions from Practitioners. One practitioner raised the
knowledge gap between software engineers and ML scientists such
as "pre-training, fine-tuning, model cadence, etc." (P6) These are the
concepts that software engineers need to learn. Meanwhile, the
practitioner also called out the need to improve the coding quality
of ML scientists in general: "ML scientists usually develop many new
models and launch them, and then find new things, but for the old
models, they don’t care much and stop maintaining them anymore.
Our ratio of SDEs and ML scientists is 1:4, so SDEs do not have much
bandwidth to help scientists. Instead, they wrote some documents
about coding standards, and let scientists write the code and SDEs
would review them. SDEs also created coding packages to make scien-
tists easier to write code themselves. There were a lot of discussions
within the team on this." (P6) The practitioner agreed that documen-
tation is, in general, a good way to address this issue. For example,
it will help if ML scientists write documentation for all roles at the
system level rather than for ML scientists themselves. Conversely, it
also helps if software engineers write documentation about coding
standards or create coding packages for ML scientists. The above
evidence led to the following proposition:

5.6
Process

5.6.1
Challenges in Literature. From a software process perspec-
tive, in the literature of ML-enabled systems, several studies have
reported a lack of a good, well-defined, system-wide focused pro-
cess [3, 26, 44, 45]. In addition, some studies reported that the
planning and estimate are difficult due to the uncertain and experi-
mental nature of ML engineering [3, 23, 44].

5.6.2
Discussions from Practitioners. All of the practitioners agreed
on the ad-hoc process for the development process of complex ML-
enabled systems due to the uncertainty of science-like experiments
of ML development. Most of the practitioners agreed that the con-
cept of decomposition of the system, subsystem, and components
of the V-Model helps define the responsibility boundary much
more easily. This also helps explicitly call out phases that may
be neglected such as requirements, V&V, and retirement at each
level. One practitioner mentioned that it’s sometimes easy to forget
about the system level and component level due to the complexity
of ML-based projects (P2). For system Retirement / Cleanup, one
practitioner had the experience of multiple A/B testing codes not
being cleaned up, and this caused lots of confusion and even bugs
in the system (P1). The above evidence led to the following propo-
sition:

PR8: Documentation at the system, subsystem, and component
(ML, non-ML, data, infra) levels should be created, approved by
the corresponding owners and tracked for any changes, with
consolidated terminology understood by all roles involved in
building ML-enabled systems. (SE5, SE10)

5.7.3
Contributions of the V-Model. Likewise, clear system bound-
ary, system responsibility, and V&V (SE5) of V-Model ensures con-
sistent and inclusive documentation that can be accessed and un-
derstood by roles with very different skills (ML scientists, software
engineers, etc.) and different system level for building ML-enabled
systems.

PR7: The software development lifecycle (SDLM) for ML-
enabled systems should follow layered decomposition of sys-
tems, to subsystem, to components (ML, non-ML, data, infra),
with continuous in-process V&V at system, subsystem, and
component levels, continuous risk management for the uncer-
tainty of ML, and responsibility boundaries for roles including
software engineers, ML scientists, product managers, and data
engineers, etc. (V, SE5)

6
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND
FUTURE WORK

In this work, we take a Systems Engineering lens to close the gap
in collaboration challenges when building ML-enabled systems
through the application of the V-Model. With the V-Model and
the interviews with industrial practitioners, we collected empir-
ical evidence and then developed 8 propositions to address the
research question of how can software process life cycles be estab-
lished to address the interdisciplinary collaboration challenges from
ML-enabled systems? Our study revealed that, despite requiring
additional efforts, the characteristics of V-Model, such as the sys-
tem decomposition, clear boundaries and responsibilities between
systems and components, and consistency of V&V, align effectively
with several collaboration challenges encountered by practitioners
when building ML-enabled systems. This work makes contribu-
tions by 1) conducting one of the first exploratory studies to apply

5.6.3
Contributions of the V-Model. Similarly, clear system bound-
ary and V&V (SE5) of V-Model enforce the consistency at system
level, subsystem level, and component level for the software devel-
opment process in building ML-enabled systems.

5.7
Organization, Teams, and Responsibility

5.7.1
Challenges in Literature. There are concerns in the literature
about interdisciplinary collaboration and communications for roles
like ML scientists and software engineers [44, 45]. Several studies
reported a lack of diverse skill sets for building ML-enabled sys-
tems, including expertise from engineering, statistics, business, UX

V-Model in building ML-enabled systems, and 2) addressing the gap
of these collaboration challenges with a set of 8 propositions and
their connections to V-Model. We recommend future research to
investigate new process models, frameworks and tools that leverage
these characteristics of V-Model for building ML-enabled systems.
On the other hand, limitations do exist for the use of V-Model.
They include jumping between phases (e.g., from design back to
requirements), failure to capture cyclical/iterative ways of software
development, heavy documentation, lack of "Speed to market" and
"Requirement Variability" due to its limited flexibility, agility, and
adaptability to changes. These limitations could be one of the rea-
sons that V-Model, to our knowledge, has not been adopted by
organizations in practice for ML development. Thus, one future
direction is to explore various ways to understand and address the
trade-off between the amount of additional effort required and the
actual benefits (or Return on Investment) of V-Model in building
ML-enabled systems.

[13] Eric J Braude and Michael E Bernstein. 2016. Software engineering: modern
approaches. Waveland Press.
[14] Adolf-Peter Bröhl. 1993. Das V-Modell: Der Standard für die Softwareentwicklung
mit Praxisleitfaden. Oldenbourg.
[15] F Cechini, R Ice, and D Binkley. 2009. Systems Engineering Guidebook for Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems. California Division of the United States Department
of Transportation Federal Highway Administration and the California Department
of Transportation (2009).
[16] Johan Cederbladh, Antonio Cicchetti, and Jagadish Suryadevara. 2023. Early Vali-
dation and Verification of System Behaviour in Model-Based Systems Engineering:
A Systematic Literature Review. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology (2023).
[17] Jiyoo Chang and Christine Custis. 2022. Understanding Implementation Chal-
lenges in Machine Learning Documentation. In Equity and Access in Algorithms,
Mechanisms, and Optimization. 1–8.
[18] Graham Dove, Kim Halskov, Jodi Forlizzi, and John Zimmerman. 2017. UX design
innovation: Challenges for working with machine learning as a design material.
In Proceedings of the 2017 chi conference on human factors in computing systems.
278–288.
[19] Gary Ericson, William Anton Rohm, Josée Martens, Kent Sharkey, Craig Casey,
Beth Harvey, and Nick Schonning. 2017. Team data science process documenta-
tion. Retrieved April 11 (2017), 2019.
[20] James Fanson. 2010. Lessons learned from the Kepler Mission and space telescope
management. In An Optical Believe It or Not: Key Lessons Learned II, Vol. 7796.
SPIE, 25–30.
[21] Daniel R Georgiadis, Thomas A Mazzuchi, and Shahram Sarkani. 2013. Using
multi criteria decision making in analysis of alternatives for selection of enabling
technology. Systems Engineering 16, 3 (2013), 287–303.
[22] Görkem Giray. 2021. A software engineering perspective on engineering machine
learning systems: State of the art and challenges. Journal of Systems and Software
180 (2021), 111031.
[23] Valentina Golendukhina, Valentina Lenarduzzi, and Michael Felderer. 2022. What
is software quality for AI engineers? Towards a thinning of the fog. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Conference on AI Engineering: Software Engineering for AI.
1–9.
[24] Iris Graessler and Julian Hentze. 2020. The new V-Model of VDI 2206 and its
validation. at-Automatisierungstechnik 68, 5 (2020), 312–324.
[25] Venkat Gudivada, Amy Apon, and Junhua Ding. 2017. Data quality consid-
erations for big data and machine learning: Going beyond data cleaning and
transformations. International Journal on Advances in Software 10, 1 (2017), 1–20.
[26] Mark Haakman, Luís Cruz, Hennie Huijgens, and Arie van Deursen. 2021. AI
lifecycle models need to be revised: An exploratory study in Fintech. Empirical
Software Engineering 26 (2021), 1–29.
[27] Reinhard Haberfellner, Olivier De Weck, Ernst Fricke, and Siegfried Vössner.
2019. Systems engineering: fundamentals and applications. Springer.
[28] Ling Huang, Anthony D. Joseph, Blaine Nelson, Benjamin IP Rubinstein, and
J. Doug Tygar. 2011. Adversarial machine learning. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM
Workshop on Security and Artificial Intelligence. 43–58.
[29] Xiaowei Huang, Daniel Kroening, Wenjie Ruan, James Sharp, Youcheng Sun,
Emese Thamo, Min Wu, and Xinping Yi. 2020. A survey of safety and trust-
worthiness of deep neural networks: Verification, testing, adversarial attack and
defence, and interpretability. Computer Science Review 37 (2020), 100270.
[30] Meenu Mary John, Helena Holmström Olsson, and Jan Bosch. 2020. Ai deploy-
ment architecture: Multi-case study for key factor identification. In 2020 27th
Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC). IEEE, 395–404.
[31] Miryung Kim, Thomas Zimmermann, Robert DeLine, and Andrew Begel. 2017.
Data scientists in software teams: State of the art and challenges. IEEE Transac-
tions on Software Engineering 44, 11 (2017), 1024–1038.
[32] Alexander Kossiakoff, William N. Sweet, Sam Seymour, and Steven M. Biemer.
2011. Systems Engineering: Principles and Practice. John Wiley & Sons.
[33] Samuli Laato, Matti Mäntymäki, Matti Minkkinen, Teemu Birkstedt, AKM Is-
lam, and Denis Dennehy. 2022. Integrating machine learning with software
development lifecycles: Insights from experts. (2022).
[34] Grace A Lewis, Ipek Ozkaya, and Xiwei Xu. 2021. Software architecture challenges
for ml systems. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance
and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 634–638.
[35] Shuyue Li, Jiaqi Guo, Jian-Guang Lou, Ming Fan, Ting Liu, and Dongmei Zhang.
2022. Testing machine learning systems in industry: an empirical study. In
Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice. 263–272.
[36] Hanyan Liu, Samuel Eksmo, Johan Risberg, and Regina Hebig. 2020. Emerging
and changing tasks in the development process for machine learning systems.
In Proceedings of the international conference on software and system processes.
125–134.
[37] Qiang Liu, Pan Li, Wentao Zhao, Wei Cai, Shui Yu, and Victor CM Leung. 2018.
A survey on security threats and defensive techniques of machine learning: A
data driven view. IEEE access 6 (2018), 12103–12117.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I gratefully thank the 11 participants for conducting the interviews,
and thank the anonymous reviewers for their invaluable feedback.
I extend my gratitude to CAIN for providing a platform to research
works with a systems and life cycle perspective. Finally, this work
would not be possible without the following people: my wife Monica
Ma for her support, and my parents Baofu Wu and Jing Wang for
their support, especially for helping take care of my child when
needed.

REFERENCES

[1] Rama Akkiraju, Vibha Sinha, Anbang Xu, Jalal Mahmud, Pritam Gundecha,
Zhe Liu, Xiaotong Liu, and John Schumacher. 2020. Characterizing machine
learning processes: A maturity framework. In Business Process Management:
18th International Conference, BPM 2020, Seville, Spain, September 13–18, 2020,
Proceedings 18. Springer, 17–31.
[2] Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall, Ece
Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan, Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019.
Software engineering for machine learning: A case study. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice
(ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, 291–300.
[3] Anders Arpteg, Björn Brinne, Luka Crnkovic-Friis, and Jan Bosch. 2018. Software
engineering challenges of deep learning. In 2018 44th euromicro conference on
software engineering and advanced applications (SEAA). IEEE, 50–59.
[4] Sundramoorthy Balaji and M Sundararajan Murugaiyan. 2012. Waterfall vs.
V-Model vs. Agile: A comparative study on SDLC. International Journal of
Information Technology and Business Management 2, 1 (2012), 26–30.
[5] David Beale and Joseph Bonometti. 2006. Systems engineering (SE)-the systems
design process. The Lunar Engineering Handbook, Auburg University, Auburn
(2006).
[6] Thomas F Bersson, Thomas Mazzuchi, and Shahram Sarkani. 2012. A framework
for application of system engineering process models to sustainable design of
high performance buildings. Journal of Green Building 7, 3 (2012), 171–192.
[7] Alex Bitektine. 2008. Prospective case study design: Qualitative method for
deductive theory testing. Organizational research methods 11, 1 (2008), 160–180.
[8] Benjamin S. Blanchard and Wolter J. Fabrycky. 2011. Systems Engineering and
Analysis. Prentice Hall.
[9] DA Bodner and WB Rouse. 2009. Handbook of systems engineering and man-
agement. Wiley. chapter Organizational Simulation (2009).
[10] Markus Borg, Cristofer Englund, Krzysztof Wnuk, Boris Duran, Christoffer
Levandowski, Shenjian Gao, Yanwen Tan, Henrik Kaijser, Henrik Lönn, and
Jonas Törnqvist. 2019. Safely entering the deep: A review of verification and
validation for machine learning and a challenge elicitation in the automotive
industry. Journal of Automotive Software Engineering 1, 1 (2019), 1–19.
[11] Jan Bosch, Helena Holmström Olsson, and Ivica Crnkovic. 2021. Engineering ai
systems: A research agenda. Artificial Intelligence Paradigms for Smart Cyber-
Physical Systems (2021), 1–19.
[12] Houssem Ben Braiek and Foutse Khomh. 2020. On testing machine learning
programs. Journal of Systems and Software 164 (2020), 110542.

[38] Mark W. Maier and Eberhardt Rechtin. 2009. The Art of Systems Architecting.
CRC Press.
[39] Sasu Mäkinen, Henrik Skogström, Eero Laaksonen, and Tommi Mikkonen. 2021.
Who needs MLOps: What data scientists seek to accomplish and how can MLOps
help?. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 1st Workshop on AI Engineering-Software Engineering
for AI (WAIN). IEEE, 109–112.
[40] Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Lidia Contreras-Ochando, Cesar Ferri, José
Hernández-Orallo, Meelis Kull, Nicolas Lachiche, María José Ramírez-Quintana,
and Peter Flach. 2019. CRISP-DM twenty years later: From data mining processes
to data science trajectories. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
33, 8 (2019), 3048–3061.
[41] John TJ Mathieson, Thomas Mazzuchi, and Shahram Sarkani. 2020. The sys-
tems engineering DevOps lemniscate and model-based system operations. IEEE
Systems Journal 15, 3 (2020), 3980–3991.
[42] Gary McGraw, Harold Figueroa, Victor Shepardson, and Richie Bonett. 2020.
An architectural risk analysis of machine learning systems: Toward more secure
machine learning. Technical Report. Berryville Institute of Machine Learning, v
1.0.
[43] Naja Holten Møller, Claus Bossen, Kathleen H. Pine, Trine Rask Nielsen, and
Gina Neff. 2020. Who does the work of data? Interactions 27, 3 (2020), 52–55.
[44] Nadia Nahar, Haoran Zhang, Grace Lewis, Shurui Zhou, and Christian Kästner.
2023. A Meta-Summary of Challenges in Building Products with ML Components–
Collecting Experiences from 4758+ Practitioners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00078
(2023).
[45] Nadia Nahar, Shurui Zhou, Grace Lewis, and Christian Kästner. 2022. Collabora-
tion challenges in building ml-enabled systems: Communication, documentation,
engineering, and process. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering. 413–425.
[46] Morteza Namvar, Ali Intezari, Saeed Akhlaghpour, and Justin P Brienza. 2023. Be-
yond effective use: Integrating wise reasoning in machine learning development.
International Journal of Information Management 69 (2023), 102566.
[47] Paul R Niven and Ben Lamorte. 2016. Objectives and key results: Driving focus,
alignment, and engagement with OKRs. John Wiley & Sons.
[48] Katie O’Leary and Makoto Uchida. 2020. Common problems with creating
machine learning pipelines from existing code. (2020).
[49] Ipek Ozkaya. 2020. What is really different in engineering AI-enabled systems?
IEEE software 37, 4 (2020), 3–6.
[50] Patrick Petersen, Hanno Stage, Jacob Langner, Lennart Ries, Philipp Rigoll,
Carl Philipp Hohl, and Eric Sax. 2022. Towards a Data Engineering Process
in Data-Driven Systems Engineering. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on
Systems Engineering (ISSE). IEEE, 1–8.
[51] Romesh Ranawana and Asoka S Karunananda. 2021. An agile software develop-
ment life cycle model for machine learning application development. In 2021 5th
SLAAI International Conference on Artificial Intelligence (SLAAI-ICAI). IEEE, 1–6.
[52] Vincenzo Riccio, Gunel Jahangirova, Andrea Stocco, Nargiz Humbatova, Michael
Weiss, and Paolo Tonella. 2020. Testing machine learning based systems: a
systematic mapping. Empirical Software Engineering (2020), 1–62.
[53] Jane Ritchie and Liz Spencer. 2002. Qualitative data analysis for applied policy
research. In Analyzing qualitative data. Routledge, 173–194.
[54] Andrew P Sage and William B Rouse. 2014. Handbook of systems engineering and
management. John Wiley & Sons.
[55] Rick Salay and Krzysztof Czarnecki. 2018. Using machine learning safely in auto-
motive software: An assessment and adaption of software process requirements
in ISO 26262. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01614 (2018).
[56] Rick Salay, Rodrigo Queiroz, and Krzysztof Czarnecki. 2017. An analysis of ISO
26262: Using machine learning safely in automotive software. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.02435 (2017).
[57] Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highfill, Diana Akrong, Praveen
Paritosh, and Lora M. Aroyo. 2021. “Everyone wants to do the model work, not
the data work”: Data Cascades in High-Stakes AI. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.
[58] Nithya Sambasivan and Rajesh Veeraraghavan. 2022. The Deskilling of Domain
Expertise in AI Development. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[59] Iqbal H Sarker. 2021. Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications and
research directions. SN computer science 2, 3 (2021), 160.
[60] Sebastian Schelter, Dustin Lange, Philipp Schmidt, Meltem Celikel, Felix Biess-
mann, and Andreas Grafberger. 2018. Automating Large-Scale Data Quality
Verification. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11, 12 (2018), 1781–1794.
[61] David Sculley, Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, Eugene Davydov, Todd Phillips, Diet-
mar Ebner, Vinay Chaudhary, Michael Young, Jean-Francois Crespo, and Dan
Dennison. 2015. Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems. Advances
in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[62] Alex Serban, Koen van der Blom, Holger Hoos, and Joost Visser. 2020. Adoption
and effects of software engineering best practices in machine learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). 1–12.

[63] Alex Serban and Joost Visser. 2022. Adapting software architectures to machine
learning challenges. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 152–163.
[64] Mary Shaw and Liming Zhu. 2022. Can software engineering harness the benefits
of advanced AI? IEEE Software 39, 6 (2022), 99–104.
[65] Md Saeed Siddik and Cor-Paul Bezemer. 2023. Do Code Quality and Style Issues
Differ Across (Non-) Machine Learning Notebooks? Yes!. In 2023 IEEE 23rd Inter-
national Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM).
IEEE, 72–83.
[66] Micah J Smith, Carles Sala, James Max Kanter, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni. 2020.
The machine learning bazaar: Harnessing the ml ecosystem for effective system
development. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data. 785–800.
[67] Stefan Studer, Thanh Binh Bui, Christian Drescher, Alexander Hanuschkin, Lud-
wig Winkler, Steven Peters, and Klaus-Robert Müller. 2021. Towards CRISP-ML
(Q): a machine learning process model with quality assurance methodology.
Machine learning and knowledge extraction 3, 2 (2021), 392–413.
[68] Andreas Vogelsang and Markus Borg. 2019. Requirements engineering for ma-
chine learning: Perspectives from data scientists. In 2019 IEEE 27th International
Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW). IEEE, 245–251.
[69] David D Walden et al. 2015. Systems engineering handbook: A guide for system
life cycle processes and activities. (2015).
[70] Zhiyuan Wan, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Gail C Murphy. 2019. How does machine
learning change software development practices? IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 47, 9 (2019), 1857–1871.
[71] Charles S. Wasson. 2006. Systems Engineering: Coping with Complexity. John
Wiley & Sons.
[72] Steven Euijong Whang and Jae-Gil Lee. 2020. Data collection and quality chal-
lenges for deep learning. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 13, 12 (2020),
3429–3432.
[73] Wikipedia. 2023.
Systems engineering — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia.
1163252030. [Online; accessed 08-August-2023].
[74] Carl Wilhjelm and Awad A. Younis. 2020. A threat analysis methodology for
security requirements elicitation in machine learning based systems. In 2020
IEEE 20th International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security
Companion (QRS-C). IEEE, 426–433.
[75] Jie JW Wu, Thomas A Mazzuchi, and Shahram Sarkani. 2023. Comparison of
multi-criteria decision-making methods for online controlled experiments in a
launch decision-making framework. Information and Software Technology 155
(2023), 107115.
[76] Oliver Zendel, Markus Murschitz, Martin Humenberger, and Wolfgang Herzner.
2015. CV-HAZOP: Introducing test data validation for computer vision. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 2066–2074.
[77] Jie M. Zhang, Mark Harman, Lei Ma, and Yang Liu. 2020. Machine learning testing:
Survey, landscapes and horizons. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2020).