Léo Pouy1, Fouad Khenfri1, Patrick Leserf1, Chokri Mraidha2, Cherif Larouci1

Ecole Supérieure des Techniques Aéronautiques et de Construction Automobile1,,

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France 2


Abstract
As we advance in the fast-growing era of Machine Learning,
various new and more complex neural architectures are aris-
ing to tackle problem more efficiently. On the one hand their
efficient usage requires advanced knowledge and expertise,
which is most of the time difficult to find on the labor market.
On the other hand, searching for an optimized neural archi-
tecture is a time-consuming task when it is performed manu-
ally using a trial and error approach. Hence, a method and a
tool support is needed to assist users of neural architectures,
leading to an eagerness in the field of Automatic Machine
Learning (AutoML). When it comes to Deep Learning, an
important part of AutoML is the Neural Architecture Search
(NAS). In this paper, we propose a novel cell-based hierar-
chical search space, easy to comprehend and manipulate. The
objectives of the proposed approach are to optimize the
search-time and to be general enough to handle most of state
of the art Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) architec-
tures.

in training as well as once in deployment. Therefore, it is
necessary for a number of real world constrained problem,
such as embedded systems, to take the target’s resource con-
straints into account while performing NAS, so the selected
model meets the possible restrictions (maximum execution
time, limited storage, limited random-access memory, etc.).

To perform a NAS, two elements are needed. First a
search space to explore, containing all the possible architec-
tures that can be found. Then an optimization algorithm is
used to explore this search space to find the best or a satis-
factory solution. However, search spaces for NAS can rap-
idly become extremely large (for example, the search space
proposed in Pham et. al. has over 1015 candidate architec-
tures), and take long time to converge to a solution (Zoph
et.al. (2018) takes 2000 GPU days). To address this prob-
lem, one can either develop more efficient optimization al-
gorithm to explore the search space, or reduce the search
space. The latter implies needs to be carefully done, as re-
ducing the search space might lead to excluding optimal so-
lutions. Another downside is that limiting the search space
implies limiting the freedom of a user to orient the search
toward certain architectures.

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML), especially Deep Learning (DL), is
a field that has seen a high growth of interest in the last dec-
ades, in research as well as in the industry. However, as
Deep Learning algorithms are black boxes, the development
of a deep learning model is very empirical and a lot of expe-
rience is needed to find the right Neural Architecture and
fine tune its HyperParameters. That is where Automatic Ma-
chine Learning (AutoML) comes in. Indeed, AutoML aims
at automating the tedious tasks when developing a ML
model, so less human input and experience is needed to
build efficient models. This is a promising field that has seen
a lot of innovation in the last years (Xin et. Al. 2021).

Therefore, this paper focuses on the definition of an adap-
tive base search space that is general enough to find state-
of-the-art architecture.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
• A background and related work.
• A casual description of the search space structure.
• A formalization of the search space and the way to gener-
ate architectures.
• A description of the optimization loop intended and the
one used in preliminary results.
• A preliminary implementation and results obtained
• Conclusion and future work.

For DL, the AutoML optimization is separated into two
problems: HyperParameter Optimization (HPO) and Neural
Architecture Search (NAS), the first being related to training
parameters (such as the learning rate, the momentum, the
batch size, etc.), while the second is related to the model pa-
rameters (such as the number of layers, the number of neu-
rons for a densely connected layer, the kernel size of the
convolution layers, etc.).

Background

To define good properties for an efficient search space, this
section provides an overlook of the history of well perform-
ing architectures. A focus has been made on Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) architectures which are the most
known DL models for computer vision.

The NAS when designing the DL model, not only have
an influence on the accuracy of the model but also defines
the execution time and the overall computational demands,

Then came AlexNet (Krizhevsky et. al. 2017) in 2012
demonstrated that having a deeper model, meaning the ar-
chitecture has more layers, generally increases the perfor-
mance of the model. Moreover, they used GPU to compen-
sate for the increase in computational cost. Hence the ability
to easily control the number of layers in the search space.

Hierarchical search space (Liu H. et. al. 2019, Liu C. et.
al. 2019, and Zhang et. al. 2021) further extend the cell-
based search space. It came from the observation that con-
trolling the resolution of the images throughout the network
can highly increase the performance (Long et. al. 2015 and
Ronneberg et. al. 2015). Therefore, a hierarchical search
space is a cell-based search space with the notion of spatial
resolution control. This means that throughout the model,
the spatial resolution can stay the same, or be downsampled
(halving the resolution by 2 and doubling the number of fil-
ters), or upsampled (doubling the resolution and halving the
number of filters). We chose to tackle this issue in our search
space as well, as these NAS frameworks define the current
state of the art in term of Computer Vision AutoML.

Another historic architecture is the VGG model (Simo-
nyan et. al. 2014), which added the notion of reducing the
resolution of the images when going deeper in the layers.
This enabled to extract finer features from the image. So the
includes capability to reduce the spatial resolution.

In 2014, Szegedy et. al. proposed GoogLeNet, a model
based on Inception modules. Those modules perform con-
volution in parallel, effectively making the model wider ra-
ther than deeper. This enable to reduce the overfitting. This
motivated the choice to design the search space such that
convolutions can be done in parallel. We call this parallel-
ization “pipelines”.

Therefore, this work has a similar search space to the one
used by Liu C. et al. (2019) and Zhang et. al. (2021), but
tries to make it more flexible to enhance the scope of obtain-
able architectures while keeping the complexity of the
search space mastered.

Finally came ResNet (He et. al. 2015) that introduced the
notion of “skipping” layers. A skip is the operation of add-
ing (or concatenating) the result of a previous layer to the
result of the current layer, retaining the features extracted
before throughout the model. So we implemented that some
of the pipelines can be identity operation, recreating the Res-
Net feature.

Description of the search space

Lately, there have been gain in interest to go to simpler
models (Hasanpour et. al. 2018 and Assiri 2020) that still
performs state-of-the-art accuracy. These works benefit
from a high amount of regularization enabling them to train
a lot without overfitting. This is why the option to put regu-
larization component in the search space has been added.

This proposed search space focuses on the feature extraction
part of the deep learning model. Consequently, if the feature
extraction is not sufficient by itself, an output module can
be set manually, for example a fully connected layer (FC).

In this section, the search space will be presented begin-
ning by its highest level, then the structure of a cell is shown,
and finally the fundamental component, the blocks, will be
described.

Related work

A cell based search space

This section describes the three main categories of search
space for NAS.

Figure 1 presents the overall structure of the cell-based
search space. It is constituted of 𝐿𝑐 layers of cells in series.
In each cell layer, one cell is selected from the 𝑁𝑐 possible
cells. Each cell can be configured with 𝑃𝑐 options as “a nor-
mal cell” which keeps the spatial resolution of the input ten-
sor, also “a reduction cell” which divides the spatial resolu-
tion by 2 and multiplies the number of filters by 2. Thus, we
have to evaluate (𝑃𝑐× 𝑁𝑐)𝐿𝑐 architectures.

Chen et al. (2016), inspired by transfer learning (Yosinski
et. al. 2014), proposed an architecture generation based on
altering existing networks, making them deeper and/or
wider at each iteration. This has the effect to retain the
knowledge of the previous model while improving its capa-
bilities. However, this method is not suited for our problem
as it needs an existing model. Indeed, we aim at developing
a search space that can include architecture that are not de-
rived from human-crafted architecture.

Before selecting the cells, they must first be constructed.
To do so, the cell is composed of two parts: a convolutional
part (making the operations) and a reduction part (control-
ling the spatial resolution).

Following the observation that the repetition of modules
(Szegedy et. al. 2014) performs really well, Pham et. al.

𝐿𝑟+ 𝑃𝑟× 𝑁𝑟. The first term presents the possibility
to create 𝐿𝑟 layers of parallel reduction block before the
merge operation (see Figure 3.a). The second term presents
the possibility to create one reduction block layer after the
merge operation (Figure 3.b). In each layer, one reduction
block is selected from the 𝑁𝑟 blocks. The 𝑃𝑟 options define
the type of the merge operations as addition or concatenate.

Figure 1 Structure of the search space

Inside of a cell

The convolutional part, shown in Figure 2, holds the opera-
tions. It is composed of 𝐿𝑃 parallel pipelines. Each pipeline
contains up to 𝐿𝐵 layers of blocks in series. In each block
layer, one block is selected from the 𝑁𝐵 possible blocks. As
a block have 𝑃𝐵 options that can be selected as well, the
number of possible pipeline architectures is (𝑃𝐵× 𝑁𝐵)𝐿𝐵.
Thus, the number of possible convolutional part architec-
tures is (𝑃𝐵× 𝑁𝐵)𝐿𝐵∗𝐿𝐵.

Figure 3.a Reduction blocks before the merging

Figure 3.b Reduction block after the merging

Figure 3 Reduction part

Blocks

A block is a basic element in our architecture and is defined
by the user. A block can contain a single operation or a
group of operations. An operation can be a convolution,
polling, dense, or merge. A block can be assigned some op-
tions to create different configurations of the blocks. There-
fore, the user needs to give a set of blocks that can be se-
lected in the pipelines of the convolution part as well as a set
of reduction blocks for the reduction part.

Figure 2 Convolution part

The reduction part presented in Figure 3 controls the spa-
tial resolution of the input tensor using three methods
downsampling, upsampling or samesampling:


The downsampling halves the dimensions of the ten-
sors (height and length of the image) and double the
number of filters.

Where:
• 0 ≤𝑥< (𝑃𝑐× 𝑁𝑐)𝐿𝑐 represents the allocation of 𝑃𝑐× 𝑁𝑐
cells into 𝐿𝑐 layers (see Figure 1)
• 𝑥𝑖𝑗 is the parameter of ith cell where 𝑗= 1, … , 𝐿𝑃𝑖 pre-
sents the pipeline of convolution part 0 ≤𝑥𝑖𝑗< (𝑃𝐵×
𝑁𝐵)𝐿𝐵 and 𝑗= 𝐿𝑃𝑖+ 1 is the reduction part 0 ≤𝑥𝑖𝑗<
𝑃𝑟× 𝑁𝑟

𝐿𝑟+ 𝑃𝑟× 𝑁𝑟.

Optimization loop

To test the search space, multi-objective Evolutionary Algo-
rithm (EA) has been used. The search space is meant to run
with two loops, as shown in Figure 5: a first loop creates 𝑁𝐶
cells, while the inner loop puts the cells in the layers and
selects the 𝑃𝐶 options.

This double optimization loop enables to separate the
search space in, on the one hand, the search of 𝑁𝐶 cells with
a complexity of (𝑃𝐵× 𝑁𝐵)𝐿𝐵+ 𝑃𝑟× 𝑁𝑟× (𝑁𝑟

𝐿𝑟+ 1) each
and, on the other hand, the search of the structure with a
complexity of (𝑃𝐶∗𝑁𝐶)𝐿𝐶.

Figure 4 Example of blocks

Formalization of the search space

This section explains how the search space is mathemati-
cally explored, and how the architecture is generated from
it.

In our approach, the AutoML problem is formalized as a
constrained multi-objective optimization problem described
by the following equation:

𝑓1(𝑋)
𝑓2(𝑋)

min
𝑋𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝑋≤𝑋𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐹(𝑋) = {

⋮
𝑓𝑚(𝑋)

𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜
ℎ𝑖(𝑋) = 0, 𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝑛ℎ
𝑔𝑖(𝑋) ≤0, 𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝑛𝑔

Figure 5 Optimization loop

However, for preliminary testing, the search has been
made in a single loop where the EA create populations and
optimize directly on the vector X.

Where 𝐹(𝑋) is the set of the objective functions that
needs to be minimized. The functions ℎ𝑖(𝑋) and 𝑔𝑖(𝑋) are
respectively the constraints of equality and inequalities, and
give further boundaries to the search space.

We developed the implementation of the search space using
Keras (Chollet F. et al. 2015), running on a NVIDIA Quadro
RTX 6000. To perform the multi-objective EA, the pymoo
(Blank and Deb 2020) library has been used.
Search space parameters
To define the search space, the blocks available must first
be chosen. All the blocks used, illustrated in Figure 6, have
the same structure. They differ by the operation they hold
and the options they can have.

The operations available, commonly used in CNNs, are
the following (all these operations are made with padding):
• 2D Convolution with a 3x3 kernel
• 2D Convolution with a 5x5 kernel
• 2D Convolution with a 7x7 kernel
• 2D MaxPooling with a 3x3 pool size
• Depthwise separable 2D Convolution with a 7x7 kernel.
Concerning the options, they concern the presence, or not,
of a batch normalization layer (B) or a ReLU activation
layer (R). There is also an option to skip the block, meaning
it becomes an identity block. Therefore, the options can be
as following:
• Skip
• No batch normalization & no activation function
• Batch normalization & no activation function
• Batch normalization & activation function before the op-
eration
• Batch normalization & activation function after the oper-
ation
• No batch normalization & activation function before the
operation
• No batch normalization & activation function after the
operation.

Results on MNIST

The previously presented implementation has been run
twice on MNIST (LeCun et. al. 2010), and obtained the Pa-
reto front given in Figure 7. The NAS found architectures
with similar performance in both runs, showing the steadi-
ness of the method.

Figure 6 Block in the implementation

When it comes to the reduction blocks, they have no op-
tions and can either be:
• a 2D MaxPooling with a 3x3 pool size and a stride of 2x2
• a 2D Convolution with a 1x1 kernel and a stride of 2x2
• an identity operation (skip).
So in this case, they can only perform downsampling or
samesampling.

For the structure, the parameters are as follows:
• There are 4 blocks in a pipeline,
• There are 3 pipelines in the convolution part,

Figure 7 Pareto front for MNIST experiment

Therefore, while the method did not reach the accuracy of
recent state-of-the art human-crafted architecture, as it can
be seen in Table 1, obtained results are still good enough to
validate the viability of the search space, and are promising
to pursue research in this direction.

Test Error
Model
0.16%
Efficient-CapsNet (Mazzia et. al. 2021)
0.17%
SOPCNN (Assiri et. al. 2020)
0,25%
SimpleNet (Hassanpour et. al. 2018)
0.50%
ReNet (Visin et.al. 2015)
0.60%
Convolutional Tsetlin Machine (Granmo
et.al. 2019)
0.70%
Deep Fried Convnets (Yang et.al. 2015)
0.35%
Our method
Table 1. MNIST state-of-the-art

Conclusion and future work

In this paper, we presented a method for the definition of
adaptable search spaces. Obtained search spaces can be
small and sufficiently general to include most state of the art
architectures. Furthermore, it can also be enhanced in size
(at the expense of search time/convergence difficulty) and it
is possible to implement specific blocks that could help im-
prove the performance, such as SENets (Hu et. al .2020).

We implemented a preliminary version of our NAS
framework and validated that it is indeed working. For fu-
ture work, we intend to improve further the search space,
and more importantly the searching strategy to make the
framework achieve close to the state of the art accuracy on
MNIST as well as on other datasets, such as CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, ImageNet, Cityscapes.

References

Assiri, Y. 2020. Stochastic Optimization of Plain Convolutional
Neural Networks with Simple methods. arXiv:2001.08856
Blank, J.; and Deb, K. 2020. pymoo: Multi-Objective Optimization
in Python. IEEE Access 8: 89497-89509. doi.org/10.1109/AC-
CESS.2020.2990567
Chen, T.; Goodfellow, I.; and Shlens, J. 2016. Net2Net: Accelerat-
ing Learning via Knowledge Transfer. arXiv:1511.05641
Chollet,
F.;
and
others.
2015.
Keras.
Available
at: