Denoising Heat-inspired Diffusion with Insulators for
Collision Free Motion Planning

Junwoo Chang∗1, Hyunwoo Ryu∗1, Jiwoo Kim1, Soochul Yoo1 Jongeun Choi†1,2

arXiv:2310.12609v4 [cs.RO] 12 Feb 2024

Joohwan Seo2, Nikhil Prakash2, Roberto Horowitz2

1Yonsei University, 2University of California, Berkeley

{joohwan_seo, nikhilps,
∗Contributed Equally.
†Corresponding author.

Abstract

Diffusion models have risen as a powerful tool in robotics due to their ﬂexibil-
ity and multi-modality. While some of these methods effectively address com-
plex problems, they often depend heavily on inference-time obstacle detection
and require additional equipment. Addressing these challenges, we present a
method that, during inference time, simultaneously generates only reachable goals
and plans motions that avoid obstacles, all from a single visual input.
Cen-
tral to our approach is the novel use of a collision-avoiding diffusion kernel for
training. Through evaluations against behavior-cloning and classical diffusion
models, our framework has proven its robustness.
It is particularly effective
in multi-modal environments, navigating toward goals and avoiding unreachable
ones blocked by obstacles, while ensuring collision avoidance. Project Website:

1
Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models have been recognized for multi-modality in various ﬁelds [1–11].
While motion planning [12–15] and manipulation [16–19] often present complex challenges, these
diffusion models provide effective solutions [20–25, 23, 26, 27], highlighting their growing signif-
icance in robotics. In particular, Urain et al. [27] introduced a novel method that utilizes guided
diffusion to generate both goals and motions. Compared to the process where goals are generated
and motions are planned separately, this integrated approach is more efﬁcient and has the strength
of generating only reachable goals. However, this approach necessitates comprehensive knowledge
of obstacles, potentially requiring equipment such as LIDAR during the inference time, which can
be costly and time-consuming.

To overcome this issue, we introduce an alternative approach that utilizes a diffusion model with
only a single visual input. Rather than relying on diffusion guidance to direct collision avoidance,
our method incorporates this behavior into the motion planning process. The core of our approach
is leveraging a diffusion model with a collision-avoiding diffusion kernel. Drawing inspiration from
the behavior in which heat avoids insulators, similar to collision avoidance motions, we have adapted
the modiﬁed heat equation to build our diffusion kernel that mimic behaviors of heat dispersion with
insulating obstacles. As a consequence, our approach operates efﬁciently on just a top-down view
image during the inference, making it well-suited for real-world scenarios.

We summarize our contributions as: (1) We introduce an approach leveraging collision-avoiding dif-
fusion kernel within the diffusion model, presenting a clear distinction from Gaussian distributions,
as seen in Fig.1. (2) Our method offers an end-to-end motion planning technique that, using only
a top-down view image as input during inference, ensures collision avoidance and generates only

(a) Collision-avoiding diffusion kernel
(b) Gaussian diffusion kernel

Goal (Initial)
distribution

Goal (Initial)
distribution

Acting as
insulators

Invading
obstacles

diffusion
diffusion
obstacles

obstacles

Figure 1: Collision avoiding diffusion kernel. The comparison clearly shows the differences be-
tween two diffusion kernels in an environment with obstacles. (a) The collision-avoiding diffusion
kernel moves without invading any obstacles. (b) In contrast, the Gaussian diffusion kernel often
runs into obstacles, indicating a higher risk of collisions.

reachable goals. This approach eliminates the need for detailed object state information and poten-
tial auxiliary equipment, making the process of inferring obstacle avoidance more efﬁcient. Our
experiments highlight the model’s capability to generate reachable goals while avoiding collisions
and exhibiting multi-modality against baseline methods.

2
Background

Problem statement.
Let’s deﬁne the state space in a 2D environment, X ⊂R2. The subset of X
where obstacles exist is Xobs ⊂X. The feasible space is Xfree = X\Xobs. The primary objective
is to generate the goal as well as the state sequence τ = {x1, ..., xT } where each xt ∈Xfree. Given
only a top-down view map image, y, our method aims to generate the sequence τ that reaches the
goal distribution, pg(x|y). We solve the problem by leveraging the concepts of the diffusion model.

Score-based model learning and sampling.
Diffusion models work by repeatedly denoising a
noisy distribution [28, 29]. Such models are able to enable the generation of sequence τ using
a visual input. We can express pt(x|y) as the distribution at a diffusion step, conditioned on the
given image, and p0(x|y) as the distribution centered around the goal state with minimal variance,
equivalent to pg(x|y). Using anealed Langevin dynamics, we can generate the sequence τ, provided
pt(x|y) excluding any x ∈Xobs. Training involves adding noise to the goal distribution using a
diffusion kernel, denoted as p0t(xt|x0, y). This process gradually transforms the original distribu-
tion into a noised one given by pt(xt|y) = R p0t(xt|x0, y)p0(x0|y)dx0. The model’s goal is to
accurately estimate the score sθ∗(xt) = ∇xt log pt(xt|y), similarly to Welling and Teh [30]. After
training, the model can generate states from the perturbed distribution using annealed Langevin dy-
namics sampling [29]. With a sufﬁciently small stepsize and repeated samplings, it is proven that
the ultimately generated ˜x belongs to the goal distribution p0(x|y) [29].

3
Goal generation with collision-avoiding diffusion kernel

Collision avoiding diffusion kernel.
To develop a diffusion kernel that provides collision avoid-
ance as detailed in Section 2, we derive from the heat equation:

∂u

∂t = ∇· (K(x)∇u)
(1)

However, we employed a modiﬁed version, detailed in Appendix C.1, selected for its computational
efﬁciency and compatibility with our model. The core of our approach is the collision-avoiding
diffusion kernel p0t(x|y), which is based on the heat conduction principles. The model estimates
the non-conductive areas from the map image y, identifying obstacles and map boundaries as zero-
conductivity regions. To compute this kernel, we solve the modiﬁed heat equation, where the heat
distribution u at any given time step is regarded as the distribution p0t(x|y). This distribution evolves
from the goal distribution p0(x|y) while avoiding non-conductive regions, effectively preventing
collisions as the robot navigates toward the goal by the reverse diffusion process.

Training with the collision avoiding diffusion kernel.
Target scores for our model are derived
by resolving the heat equation with obstacle consideration to form a collision-avoiding diffusion

"#

!

$!%&

$!

Figure 2: Architecture and overview of our method. The model processes the visual input y and
time t to produce an output score ﬁeld, which is then bilinearly interpolated with the input state xt
to obtain the score value at xt. To determine the next state leading to the goal, we employ annealed
Langevin dynamics sampling.

kernel. This ﬁeld is normalized to probability, logarithmically adjusted, and then differentiated to
yield the score ﬁeld. The desired score for a sampled state xt is then directly obtained from this ﬁeld.
Comprehensive methods are detailed in Appendix.C.2. The training objective is formalized as:

L(θ) = Et

λ(t)Ex0Ext|x0,yobs[∥sθ(xt, t, y) −∇xt log p0t(xt|x0, yobs)∥2
2]

(2)

where yobs represents the obstacle mask, and λ(t) = f(σt)2. Here, σt =
√

2k is the standard
deviation (std) of the Gaussian heat kernel. The function f stabilizes σt once it equals half the
image size, approximating the std of the distribution conﬁned by the map boundaries. We use the
U-net structure for the model from Ho et al. [28].

Generating states for motion planning.
The overall sequence of the inference is described in
Fig.2. Given a randomly generated map image and an initial state xT , we iteratively produce a
sequence of states xt ∈Xfree. This generation is achieved by addressing the reverse SDE with our
trained score model, leveraging the annealed Langevin dynamics sampling (details in Appendix B):

2 sθ(xt, t, y) + √αtzt,
zt ∼N(0, I)
(3)

˜xt−1 = ˜xt + αt

where αt = ǫ · λ(t)

λ(T ). In practice, we set parameters as ǫ = 0.0008, T = 10, and performed 100
annealing iterations. Every generated state belongs to pt(x|y) [29], progressively approaching the
goal distribution, p0(x|y), with collision avoidance.

Input
t = T
t = 1

(a) Reachable
(b) Unreachable

Multi-modal
goals sampled

Goals
(Apple)

Init
Dist.

Unreachable

goal not
sampled

Figure 3: Experiment results of our method. In the 64 × 64 input image, black areas indicate
obstacles, red dots illustrate states originating from the initial distribution, and green apples mark
the goals. (a) The ﬁrst row demonstrates an experiment with two multi-modal goals generated. It
proves the multi-modality of our model by moving the states toward each goal. (b) The second row
presents a similar setup, but with one goal being unreachable. It only generates the reachable goal
without any collisions with the obstacle.

4
Experiments

We assessed our method’s performance using a benchmark experiment on a noisy map from
Pearce et al. [22], setting it against three established baseline models for comparison. The ﬁrst

model is expert-data behavior cloned (BC). The second and third, named Gaussian diffusion
and Gaussian diffusion + RRT*, utilize a Vanilla diffusion model for goal generation, with the
latter also incorporating RRT* for planning.
All models under comparison employ the same

Table 1: Experiment results. Success rates and KL divergence for 10K samples, aggregated from
100 samples across 100 episodes. Whenever samples encountered obstacles or if there was a failure
in trajectory generation, they remained stationary at their current location.

Uni-modality
Multi-modality
With unreachable goal

Models
Success rate
KL diverg.
Success rate
KL diverg.
Success rate
KL diverg.

BC
100.
6.44
0.
13.32
0.
14.83
Gaussian diffusion
34.23
10.37
57.52
11.91
30.23
12.32
Gaussian diff + RRT*
98.81
6.36
97.31
6.34
50.31
23.01
Ours
98.5
6.05
99.98
6.45
100.
6.46

U-net architecture and are described in Appendix D. Our evaluation criteria encompass Uni-
modality, Multi-modality, and With unreachable goal generation. Uni-modality measures perfor-
mance in reaching a single goal, Multi-modality assesses success in multi-goal scenarios, and
With unreachable goal generation evaluates the model’s ability to avoid generating unreachable
goals.
During the initial experiment, a single goal exists, and two goals in the next experi-
ment. In the ﬁnal experiment, an obstacle is added near one of the goals, making it unreachable.

Analysis.
In Table 1, we detail the success rate, the
count of states that successfully reach any goal distribu-
tions, and the KL divergence, a metric measuring the
divergence between the empirical distribution of gener-
ated samples and ground-truth goal distribution. The BC
model performed well in a single-goal environment. How-
ever, it lacked multi-modality, as a consequence of its lim-
itations from training with MSE loss, as noted in Pearce
et al. [22]. The Gaussian diffusion lagged in both goal
attainment and divergence, as it doesn’t account for col-
lision avoidance. The Gaussian diffusion + RRT* per-
formed well in both the Uni-modality and Multi-modality
tests. Yet, it mistakenly generated the unreachable goal
in the last experiment, performing about 50% success
rate.
In contrast, our method consistently showcased
strong performance across all experiments. As illustrated
in Fig.4, our method consistently maintains high success
rate and low KL divergence, indicating a reliable perfor-
mance in achieving the desired goal distributions. The
results highlight our method’s potential performance in
real-world tasks. The visual results are displayed in Fig.3
and Appendix A.

Figure 4:
Graphical analysis of ex-
periment results. (a): success rate of
reaching goal distributions. (b) KL di-
vergence between the goal distributions
and the empirical distribution. Both in-
dicates that our method shows robust
and good performance in all scenarios,
compared to baselines.

5
Conclusion

We have introduced an end-to-end method with a condi-
tioned diffusion model to generate reachable goals with-
out collisions with just a visual input. The core of our method is the utilization of a heat-inspired
collision-avoiding diffusion kernel within a diffusion model to ensure collision avoidance. Further-
more, it can effectively avoid generating unreachable goals. Thus, we presented a framework that
is user-friendly in the sense that it does not require inference time collision checking or any auxil-
iary equipment. Future work involves extending this approach to accommodate high-dimensional
sensory inputs in the ﬁeld of robotics.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by
the Korea government (MSIT) (No.RS-2023-00221762 and No. 2021R1A2B5B01002620). This
work was also supported by the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) intramural grants
(2E31570), and a Berkeley Fellowship.

References

[1] Jiaming Song, Qinsheng Zhang, Hongxu Yin, Morteza Mardani, Ming-Yu Liu, Jan Kautz, Yongxin Chen,
and Arash Vahdat. Loss-guided diffusion models for plug-and-play controllable generation. 2023.

[2] Chenlin Meng, Robin Rombach, Ruiqi Gao, Diederik Kingma, Stefano Ermon, Jonathan Ho, and Tim
Salimans. On distillation of guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 14297–14306, 2023.

[3] Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and Michal
Irani. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6007–6017, 2023.

[4] Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.05314, 2022.

[5] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.

[6] Ruiqi Gao, Yang Song, Ben Poole, Ying Nian Wu, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning energy-based
models by diffusion recovery likelihood. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08125, 2020.

[7] Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein. Understanding
and mitigating copying in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20086, 2023.

[8] Nan Liu, Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Unsupervised compositional
concepts discovery with text-to-image generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05357, 2023.

[9] Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Sehui Kim, and Jong Chul Ye. Parallel diffusion models of operator and
image for blind inverse problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 6059–6069, 2023.

[10] Brian L Trippe, Jason Yim, Doug Tischer, David Baker, Tamara Broderick, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi
Jaakkola. Diffusion probabilistic modeling of protein backbones in 3d for the motif-scaffolding problem.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04119, 2022.

[11] Jason Yim, Brian L Trippe, Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Arnaud Doucet, Regina Barzilay, and
Tommi Jaakkola. Se (3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.02277, 2023.

[12] Lydia E Kavraki, Petr Svestka, J-C Latombe, and Mark H Overmars. Probabilistic roadmaps for path
planning in high-dimensional conﬁguration spaces. IEEE transactions on Robotics and Automation, 12
(4):566–580, 1996.

[13] Steven LaValle. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. Research Report 9811,
1998.

[14] Ruiqi Ni and Ahmed H Qureshi. Ntﬁelds: Neural time ﬁelds for physics-informed robot motion planning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00120, 2022.

[15] Ruiqi Ni and Ahmed H Qureshi. Progressive learning for physics-informed neural motion planning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.00616, 2023.

[16] Joohwan Seo, Nikhil Potu Surya Prakash, Xiang Zhang, Changhao Wang, Jongeun Choi, Masayoshi
Tomizuka, and Roberto Horowitz. Robot manipulation task learning by leveraging se (3) group invariance
and equivariance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14984, 2023.

[17] Jiwoo Kim, Hyunwoo Ryu, Jongeun Choi, Joohwan Seo, Nikhil Potu Surya Prakash, Ruolin Li, and
Roberto Horowitz. Robotic manipulation learning with equivariant descriptor ﬁelds: Generative modeling,
bi-equivariance, steerability, and locality. In RSS 2023 Workshop on Symmetries in Robot Learning, 2023.

[18] Hyunwoo Ryu, Hong-in Lee, Jeong-Hoon Lee, and Jongeun Choi.
Equivariant descriptor ﬁelds: Se
(3)-equivariant energy-based models for end-to-end visual robotic manipulation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.08321, 2022.

[19] Anthony Simeonov, Yilun Du, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Alberto Rodriguez, Pulkit
Agrawal, and Vincent Sitzmann. Neural descriptor ﬁelds: Se (3)-equivariant object representations for
manipulation. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6394–6400.
IEEE, 2022.

[20] Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for ﬂexible
behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.

[21] Wei Xiao, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Chuang Gan, and Daniela Rus. Safediffuser: Safe planning with diffusion
probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00148, 2023.

[22] Tim Pearce, Tabish Rashid, Anssi Kanervisto, Dave Bignell, Mingfei Sun, Raluca Georgescu, Sergio Val-
carcel Macua, Shan Zheng Tan, Ida Momennejad, Katja Hofmann, et al. Imitating human behaviour with
diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.

[23] Tim Pearce and Jun Zhu. Counter-strike deathmatch with large-scale behavioural cloning. In 2022 IEEE
Conference on Games (CoG), pages 104–111. IEEE, 2022.

[24] Joao Carvalho, Mark Baierl, Julen Urain, and Jan Peters. Conditioned score-based models for learning
collision-free trajectory generation. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Score-Based Methods, 2022.

[25] Joao Carvalho, An T Le, Mark Baierl, Dorothea Koert, and Jan Peters. Motion planning diffusion: Learn-
ing and planning of robot motions with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01557, 2023.

[26] Hyunwoo Ryu, Jiwoo Kim, Junwoo Chang, Hyun Seok Ahn, Joohwan Seo, Taehan Kim, Jongeun Choi,
and Roberto Horowitz. Diffusion-edfs: Bi-equivariant denoising generative modeling on se (3) for visual
robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02685, 2023.

[27] Julen Urain, Niklas Funk, Jan Peters, and Georgia Chalvatzaki. Se (3)-diffusionﬁelds: Learning smooth
cost functions for joint grasp and motion optimization through diffusion. In 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 5923–5930. IEEE, 2023.

[28] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

[29] Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

[30] Max Welling and Yee W Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pages 681–688, 2011.

[31] Curtis F Gerald. Applied numerical analysis. Pearson Education India, 2004.

Appendix

A
Benchmark experiment results

Input
t = 1
t = T’

(a) Single goal
(b) Multi-goals

Fails under
multi-modality
Init
Dist.

Goals
(Apple)

Figure 5: Performance evaluation of the BC model in terms of multi-modality. Black areas
denote obstacles, red dots represent states initiated from the initial distribution, and green apples
mark the goals. (a) The ﬁrst row presents a scenario with one reachable goal generated. (b) The
second row displays a test similar to the ﬁrst but with multi-modal goals generated. It indicates that
the behavior-cloning method performs well in uni-modal scenarios, but lacks the multi-modality.

Input

t = T
t = 1

(a) Reachable
(b) Unreachable

Init
Dist.
Goals
(Apple)

Unreachable

goal
sampled

Figure 6: Performance evaluation of the Gaussian model in sampling reachable goals. In the vi-
sual representation, black areas denote obstacles, red dots illustrate states generated by the Gaussian
model from the initial distribution, and green apples mark the goals. (a) The ﬁrst row demonstrates
an experiment with two reachable multi-modal goals generated. (b) The second row presents a sce-
nario similar to the ﬁrst, but with one unreachable goal. We use this method directly for planning or
add another motion planner to move the states toward the generated goals. The result proves that the
Gaussian diffusion model performs the multi-modality, but cannot assure reachable goal generation
or collision avoidance.

B
Detailed sampling implementation

To address convergence speed issues, Ryu et al. [26] modiﬁes the original Langevin dynamics sampling equa-
tion as follows:
˜xt−1 = ˜xt + ǫ

k1+k2

2sθ(xt, t)tk1 + t

2
zt,
zt ∼N(0, I)
(4)

This approach exhibits impressive performance in control tasks, particularly in state sampling without collisions,
mirroring our scenario. While they modify αt to tk1 for their purposes, we opt for αk1
t
for clarity, making the
temperature term adapt as αk2
t . Given that in our conﬁguration αt = ǫ ·
λ(t)
λ(T ) and αt →0 as t →0, our
adapted Langevin dynamics sampling equation can be expressed as:

˜xt−1 = ˜xt + αk1
t
2 sθ(xt, t, y) + α

k1+k2

2
t
zt,
zt ∼N(0, I)
(5)

In practice, we choose k1 = 0.6 and k2 = 0.4 for faster convergence.

C
Revised heat equation and target score computation

C.1
Revised heat equation

It is able to solve the heat equation by utilizing the standard explicit method [31]. Let’s discretize x, y, t as:
xi = i∆x, yj = j∆y, and k = n∆k. For numerical stability, it is essential to satisfy ∆k ≤∆x2

4α , under the
assumption that ∆x = ∆y. By choosing ∆x = 1 to apply in 2D pixel space and ∆k =
1
4α, the numerical
approach can be denoted as:

un+1
i,j
= un
i,j + Ki,j

un
i+1,j + un
i−1,j + un
i,j+1 + un
i,j−1 −4un
i,j

(6)

The given equation has limitations: it is time-consuming since the heat value increases at a slow rate, leading
to slow dispersion. Furthermore, empirical analysis suggests it is not appropriate for our method. Therefore,
we have made modiﬁcations to the equation:

un+1
i,j
= un
i,j + Ki,j

un
i+1,j + un
i−1,j + un
i,j+1 + un
i,j−1 −V un
i,j

(7)

where V denotes the number of valid neighboring states, speciﬁcally excluding insulators such as map
edges and obstacles. After computing, the result is smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter to mitigate numerical
inaccuracies. Subsequently, it is normalized by dividing by its sum, transforming it into a collision-avoiding
diffusion kernel. We set k in a range from 12.5 to 3612.5, with an exponential increase aligning with the
progression of t. Here, we can interpret p0t as the heat distribution at time step k.

C.2
Target score computation

We use a heat equation solver to calculate the target scores for our model, which incorporates an obstacle image
mask, denoted as yobs, and the positions of the goal, denoted as x0. The obstacle image mask is a boolean
tensor that has the same dimensions as the map image. It represents obstacles and map boundaries, which act
as non-conductive insulators within the map. In the mask, these insulators are indicated by a value of 1. They
inﬂuence the conductivity K from the heat equation (Eq.1).
The goal position is treated as the source of heat within this system. The heat equation solver then calculates
the distribution of heat as it ﬂows through the environment, taking into account the presence of obstacles, which
the heat must navigate around, similar to how heat naturally avoids insulators.
The distribution is then normalized to represent a probability density function and is marginally adjusted by
a small constant to ensure non-zero values before taking the logarithm. After logarithmic transformation, we
obtain the gradient of this log-probability ﬁeld through convolution with gradient kernels, creating the score
ﬁeld. The target score for any sampled state xt is then straightforwardly retrieved by substituting xt into this
ﬁeld. Our training objective is to have the model learn to approximate these target scores, thereby enabling the
robot to infer collision-free paths toward its goal.

D
Baseline pseudo codes

Algorithm 1 Behavior Cloning model sampling
Require: input image y, stationary number t, sampling timesteps N
1: Initial states x0
2: for i = 0 to N do
3:
dx ←BC(y, t, xi)
4:
xi+1 ←xi + dx
⊲Motion Planning
return xN

Algorithm 2 Gaussian Diffusion sampling
Require: input image y, step size ǫ
1: Initial states xT
2: for t = T to 1 do
⊲Motion Planning with Each State Generated
3:
sθ ←Gaussian(y, t, xt)
4:
xt−1 ←xt + ǫ

2sθ + √ǫzt
⊲zt ∼N(0, I)
return x0

Algorithm 3 Gaussian Diffusion + RRT* sampling
Require: input image y, step size ǫ
1: Initial states xT
2: for t = T to 1 do
⊲Goal Sampling
3:
sθ ←Gaussian(y, t, xt)
4:
xt−1 ←xt + ǫ

2sθ + √ǫzt
⊲zt ∼N(0, I)

5: x0 ←RRT ∗(x0, xT )
⊲Motion Planning toward the Generated Goal
6: return x0