Functional Diffusion

Biao Zhang
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

arXiv:2311.15435v1 [cs.CV] 26 Nov 2023

Figure 1. Functional diffusion. Our method is able to generate complicated functions with a continuous domain. From left to right, we
show 5 steps of the generating process. This particular example shows signed distance functions and we show the zero-isosurface of the
generated function in green. Furthermore, we visualize the function values on a plane, where the red colors mean larger and blue means
smaller.

Abstract

1. Introduction

In the last two years diffusion models have become the most
popular method for generative modeling of visual data, such
as 2D images [26, 27], videos [8, 10], and 3D shapes [3, 11,
35, 36]. In order to train a diffusion model, one needs to add
and subtract noise from a data sample. In order to represent
a sample, many methods use a direct representation, such
as a 2D or 3D grid. Since diffusion can be very costly, this
representation is often used in conjunction with a cascade of
diffusion models [9, 27]. Alternatively, diffusion methods
can represent samples in a compressed latent space [26].
A sample can be encoded and decoded to the compressed
space using an autoencoder whose weights are trained in a
separate pre-process.

We propose a new class of generative diffusion models,
called functional diffusion. In contrast to previous work,
functional diffusion works on samples that are represented
by functions with a continuous domain. Functional diffu-
sion can be seen as an extension of classical diffusion mod-
els to an infinite-dimensional domain. Functional diffusion
is very versatile as images, videos, audio, 3D shapes, de-
formations, etc., can be handled by the same framework
with minimal changes.
In addition, functional diffusion
is especially suited for irregular data or data defined in
non-standard domains. In our work, we derive the nec-
essary foundations for functional diffusion and propose a
first implementation based on the transformer architecture.
We show generative results on complicated signed distance
functions and deformation functions defined on 3D sur-
faces.

In our work, we explore a departure from these previous
approaches and set out to study diffusion in a functional
space. We name the resulting method functional diffusion.
In functional diffusion, the data samples are functions in

equations.
• We propose a technical realization and implementation of
the functional diffusion concept.
• We demonstrate functional diffusion on irregular domains
that are challenging to handle for existing diffusion meth-
ods.
• We demonstrate improved results on shape completion
from sparse point clouds.

2. Related Work

2.1. Generative Models

Figure 2. Signed distance functions. We show a 3D shape on the
left and on the right, we visualize the signed distances sampled in
several parallel planes.

Generative models have been extensively explored for im-
age data. We have seen several popular generative mod-
els in past years such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [5], Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [14] and Dif-
fusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [7]. GANs utilize an
adversarial training process. The versatility in generating
high-dimensional data has been proven by numerous appli-
cations and improvements. VAEs aim to learn a represen-
tation space of the data with an autoencoder and enable the
generation of new samples by sampling from the learned
space. However, the quality is often lower than GANs. This
idea is further improved in DPMs. Instead of decoding the
representation with a one-step decoder, DPMs developed
a new mechanism of progressive decoding.
DPMs have
demonstrated remarkable success in capturing and gener-
ating complex patterns in image data [7, 9, 26, 27].

a function space (see an example function in Fig. 2). In
contrast to regular diffusion, we do not start with a noisy
sample, but we need to define a noise function as a starting
point. This noise function is then gradually denoised to ob-
tain a sample from the function space. In order to realize our
idea we need multiple different representations that are dif-
ferent from regular diffusion. We employ both a continuous
and a sampled representation of a function. As the continu-
ous representation of a function, we propose a set of vectors
that are latent vectors of a functional denoising network. To
represent a sampled function, we use a set of point samples
in the domain of the function together with the correspond-
ing function values. Both of these function representations
are used during training and inference. The method is ini-
tialized by sampling a noisy continuous function that spans
the complete domain. Then we evaluate this function at dis-
crete locations to obtain a sampled representation. A train-
ing step in functional diffusion takes both the continuous
and sampled representation as input and tries to predict a
new continuous representation that is a denoised version of
the input function. This novel form of diffusion has multiple
interesting properties. First, the framework is very versatile
and can be directly adapted to many different forms of input
data. We can handle images, videos, audio, 3D shapes, de-
formations, etc., with the same framework. Second, we can
directly handle irregular data and non-standard domains as
there are few constraints on the function domain as well as
the samples of the sampled function representation. For ex-
ample, we can work with deformations on a surface, which
constitutes an irregular domain. Third, we can decouple the
representational power of the continuous and sampled func-
tion representation. Finally, we believe the idea of func-
tional diffusion is inherently technically interesting. It is a
non-trivial change and our work can lay the foundation for
a new class of diffusion models with many variations.
In summary, we make the following major contributions:
• We introduce the concept of functional diffusion, explain
the technical background and derive the corresponding

2.2. Diffusion probabilistic models

When DPMs were invented in the beginning, they showed
significant advantages in generating quality and diversity.
However, the disadvantages are also obvious. For exam-
ple, the sampling process is slower than other generative
models.
Some works [12, 16, 17, 29] are dedicated to
solving the slow sampling problem.
On the other hand,
these works [1, 25] are proposed to solve the cases of non-
Gaussian noise/degradation. However, our focus is to pro-
pose a new diffusion model for functional data.
Com-
mon data forms like images can be seen as lying in a
finite-dimensional space. However, a function is generally
infinite-dimensional. It is not straightforward to adapt exist-
ing diffusion models for functional data. A direct solution
is a two-stage training method. The first stage is to fit a
network to encode functions with finite-dimensional latent
space. In the later stage, a generative diffusion model is
trained in the learned latent space. Many methods follow
this design [3, 20, 35]. On the other hand, SSDNerf [2]
combines both stages into one that jointly optimizes an
autodecoder and a latent diffusion model.
However, the
method still trains diffusion in the latent space. The most
related work to our proposed method is DPF [37]. How-
ever, DPF still works on data sampled on a discrete grid.

DPM
Proposed

f
{xi}i∈C
{xi, f(xi)}i∈C

Gaussian n ∈RC
Random function g : X →Y
Finite-dim x0 ∈RC
Infinite-dim f0 : X →Y
Noised xt ∈RC
Noised function ft : X →Y
—"—
Context {xi, ft(xi)}i∈Q
—"—
Queries {xi, ft(xi)}i∈C
Dθ : RC →RC
Dθ : {f : X →Y} →{f : X →Y}

Table 1.
Comparison of classical DPMs and the proposed
method. For DPMs, the data samples are finite-dimensional and
the denoiser is a function of the noised data xt.
Our method
deals with infinite-dimensional functions with a continuous do-
main. Thus the denoiser Dθ is becoming a “function of a func-
tion”. This inspires us to seek a solution to find a way to process
infinite-dimensional functions with neural networks. Also note
that DPM is a special case when Q = C.

Figure 3. Function approximation. We illustrate how to approx-
imate a function with its discretized state. Left: a function whose
domain X is a manifold. Middle: sampled points in the domain.
Right: the sampled points and the corresponding function values.
Different from DPMs which sample on a grid of a fixed resolution,
we do not have this restriction.

3.1. Problem Definition

The training dataset D contains a collection of functions f0
with continuous domains X and range Y,

Thus the generated sample is still defined in a fixed reso-
lution. We refer the reader to a recent survey of diffusion
models in various domains besides images [23].

f0 : X →Y.
(1)

For example, we can represent watertight meshes as signed
distance functions f0 : R3 →R1. We also define function
set F where each element is also a function

2.3. Neural Fields

g : X →Y.
(2)

Neural networks are often used to represent functions with
a continuous domain. Here are some types of neural field
applications: 1) in computer graphics and geometry pro-
cessing, 3D shapes can be represented with implicit func-
tions and thus are suitable to be modeled with neural net-
works [3, 15, 18, 21, 22, 30, 33, 35]; 2) 3D textured objects
and scenes can be rendered with radiance fields [19] which
are also modeled with MLPs; 3) in physics, researchers
use neural networks to represent complex functions which
serve as solutions of differential equations [24]. Because of
the universal approximation ability of neural networks, neu-
ral fields often provide flexibility in handling complex and
high-dimensional data, and they can be trained end-to-end
using gradient-based optimization techniques. Most impor-
tantly, neural fields can hold data sampled from an infinite
large resolution. We refer the reader to a recent survey for
more details on neural fields [32].

The function g works similarly to the noise in traditional
diffusion models. However, in functional diffusion, we re-
quire the “noise” to be a function. We can obtain a “noised”
version ft given f0 from D and g from F,

ft(x) = αt · f0(x) + σt · g(x),
(3)

where t is a scalar from 0 (least noisy) to 1 (most noisy).
We name ft as the noised state at timestep t. The terms
αt and σt are positive scalars. In DDPM [7], they satisfy
α2
t + σ2
t = 1. Thus αt is a monotonically decreasing func-
tion of t, while σt is monotonically increasing. VDM [13]
characterizes α2
t/σ2
t as signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
Our goal is to train a denoiser which can approximate:

Dθ[ft, t](x) ≈f0(x).
(4)

This is often called x0-prediction [13] in the literature
of diffusion models.
However, other loss objectives
also exist, e.g., ϵ-prediction [7], v-prediction [28] and f-
prediction [12]. We emphasize that choosing x0-prediction
is important in the proposed functional diffusion which will
be explained later.
The objective is

3. Methodology

We first introduce the definition of the functional diffusion
in Sec. 3.1. Then we show how to train the denoising net-
work in Sec. 3.2. Lastly, we show how we sample a function
from the trained functional diffusion models in Sec. 3.3.

Ef0∈D,g∈F,t∼T (t)
h
w(t)d (Dθ[ft, t], f0)2i
,
(5)

Algorithm 1 Training

In order to make the computation tractable, our idea is to
represent functions with a set of coordinates together with
their corresponding values. Thus we sample (discretize) a
set {xi ∈X}i∈C in the domain X of ft. We feed this set to
the denoising network along with the corresponding func-
tion values {ft(xi)}i∈C (also see Fig. 3 for an illustration),

1: repeat

2:
g ∈F
▷noise function
3:
f0 ∈D
▷training function
4:
t ∼T
▷noise level
5:
αt = 1/
√

t2 + 1, σt = t/
√

t2 + 1
▷SNR
6:
Sample C
▷context
7:
Evaluate {g(xi)}i∈C and {f0(xi)}i∈C
8:
Calculate the context {ft(xi)}i∈C with Eq. (3)
9:
Sample Q
▷query
10:
Optimize Eq. (9)
▷denoise
11: until convergence

Dθ[ft, t](x) ≈Dθ ({xi, ft(xi)}i∈C, t, x) .
(6)

The design of the network Dθ varies for different applica-
tions. However, we give a template design in later sections.

Function metric.
For the function metric d(·, ·), we
choose the l-2 metric,

Algorithm 2 Sampling

X
|Dθ[ft, t](x) −f0(x)|2 dx
1/2

d(Dθ[ft, t], f0) =
Z

Ensure: Sample C and g ∈F

1: Let ft = g
2: Evaluate {xi, ft(xi)}i∈C
3: for k ∈{N, N −1, . . . , 2, 1} do
4:
tk = T(k), tk−1 = T(k −1)

(7)
The approximation of the metric d(·, ·) is also done by sam-
pling (Monte-Carlo integration),

t2
k + 1, αs = 1/
q

5:
αt = 1/
p

t2
k−1 + 1

i∈Q
|Dθ[ft, t](xi) −f0(xi)|2
!1/2

X

d (Dθ[ft, t], f0) ≈

.

t2
k + 1, σs = tk−1/
q

6:
σt = tk/
p

t2
k−1 + 1

(8)
Thus our loss objective in Eq. (5) can be written as,

7:
Predict {fs(xi)}i∈C with Eq. (11)
8:
Let ft ←fs
9: end for

i∈Q
|Dθ ({xj, ft(xj)}j∈C, t, xi) −f0(xi)|2 .
(9)

w(t)
X

10: f0(x) = Dθ ({xi, ft(xi)}i∈C, t, x)

Pixel diffusion (DPMs trained in the pixel space) can be
seen as a special case of the model by sampling C on a fixed
regular grid and letting Q = C. DPF [37] uses the term
context for C and query for Q. Thus we also follow this
convention. We summarized how we design Q and C for
different tasks in Tab. 2.

f1(x)
ft(x)
fs(x)
f0(x)

{f1(xi)}i∈C
{ft(xi)}i∈C
{fs(xi)}i∈C {f0(xi)}i∈C

Initial noise function.
For now, we still do not know how
to choose the noise function set F = {g : X →Y}. In
DPMs, the noise is often modeled with a standard Gaussian
distribution. Gaussian processes are an infinite-dimensional
generalization of multivariate Gaussian distributions. Thus,
it is straightforward to use Gaussian processes to model the
noise functions. However, in our practical experiments, we
find sampling from Gaussian processes is time-consuming
during training. Thus, we choose a simplified version. In
the case of Euclidean space, we sample Gaussian noise on
a grid in X. Then other values are interpolated with the val-
ues on the grid. If the domain X is a non-Euclidean mani-
fold which is difficult to sample, instead we define the noise
function in the ambient space of X. In this way, we defined
a way to build the function set F. During training, in each
iteration, we sample a noise function g from this set.
To sum up, the training algorithm can be found in Algo-
rithm 1.

Figure 4. Inference chain. We show a simplified 4-steps gener-
ating process in Eq. (11). The arrows show how the data flows
during inference. x represents an arbitrary query coordinate. C is
the context set. The state fs(x) requires to know both the previous
state ft(x) and {ft(xi)}i∈C. Thus it is dependent on all previous
states f<s. f0(x) is the only exception because σ0 = 0. Thus
f0(x) is fully decided by the penultimate state {fs(xi)}i∈C.

where d(·, ·) is a metric defined on the function space {f :
X →Y} and w(t) is a weighting term. We summarize
the differences between the vanilla DPMs and the proposed
functional diffusion in Tab. 1.

3.2. Parameterization

Denoising network.
The functional Dθ is parameterized
by a neural network θ. It is impossible to feed the noised
state function ft directly to the neural network as input.

Task
Input
Domain Space Output Range Space
Condition
|C|
|Q|

3D Shapes
Coordinates
R3
SDF
R1
Surface Point Clouds
49152 2048
3D Deformation Points on Manifold
M
Vector
R3
Sparse Correspondence 16384 2048

Table 2. Task designs. We show the two main tasks used to prove the efficiency of the proposed method.

Context 1
Condition

Context 2
Condition

Context L
Condition

Queries

Q

Cross Attention
K, V

K, V

K, V

K, V

Q

Q

Q

Self Attention
· · ·
Cross Attention

Cross Attention

Self Attention
Cross Attention

Self Attention

Target

AdaLN
AdaLN
AdaLN

Time embedding
Time embedding
Time embedding

Figure 5. The network design of the SDF diffusion model. The context set is split into L smaller ones. They (and optionally conditions
such as sparse surface point clouds) are fed into different stages of the network by using cross-attention. The time embedding is injected
into the network in every self-attention layer by adaptive layer normalization. After L stages, we obtain the representation vector sets and
they will be used to predict values of arbitrary queries. For SDFs, we optimize simple minimum squared errors.

obtain the “less” noised state fs where 0 ≤s < t ≤1,

{g(x)i}i∈C

g : X →Y



ft −αtDθ[ft, t]

{xi}i∈C

{ft(x)i}i∈C
σt

.
(10)

fs = αs Dθ[ft, t]

+σs

σt

estimated f0

estimated g

We can also write,

αt

σt
ft(x)+

αs −σs
αt
σt


Dθ ({xi, ft(xi)}i∈C, t, x)

fs(x) = σs

f0 : X →Y

{f0(x)i}i∈C

(11)
We sample a set C and evaluate {xi, ft(xi)}i∈C in ev-
ery denoising step. The Eq. (11) shows how the one-step
denoised function fs is obtained. We recursively apply the
denoising process from ft to fs. In the end, we obtain the
generated sample f0. More importantly, to obtain interme-
diate function values fs(x) for an arbitrary x, we need to
know ft(x), and thus all previous states for x. However,
when we are denoising the last step of the generation pro-
cess, σs = 0, which means the generated function f0(x)
is only dependent on the penultimate state of the function
{xi, fs(xi)}i∈C (also see Fig. 4). With this observation, we
can obtain the generated function values without knowing
the intermediate states except the penultimate one. During
inference, we only need to denoise the context set. This is a
key property of the proposed method which can accelerate

Figure 6. Evaluation of the context {xi, ft(xi)}i∈C. We sample
a set of points {xi}i∈C in the domain X. We evaluate the values
both in the noise function g and the ground-truth function f0. This
is how Eq. (3) works.

3.3. Inference

We adapt the sampling method proposed in DDIM [29] for
the proposed functional diffusion. As shown in Eq. (3), the
generating process is from timestep t = 1 (most noisy) to
t = 0 (least noisy). We start from an initial noise function
f1 = g ∈F. Given the noised state ft at the timestep t, we

GT
Input
3DS2VS
Ours

Source
Target
Queries
3DS2VS
Ours

Figure 8. Deformation diffusion results. In the left, we show
both the source and the target frame and the sparse correspondence
(small spheres on the body surface).

Figure 7. SDF diffusion results. We show ground-truth meshes
and the input sparse point cloud (64 points) on the left. We com-
pare our results with 3DS2VS. Since our model is probabilistic, we
can output multiple different results given different random seeds.
Our results are detailed and complete. However, the traditional
method struggles to reconstruct correct objects.

4. Results: 3D Shapes

In computer graphics, 3D models are often represented with
a function f : R3 →R1 where the input x is a 3D co-
ordinate and the output y is the signed distance to the 3D
boundary ∂Ω, i.e., y = dist(x, ∂Ω) when x ∈Ωand
y = −dist(x, ∂Ω) when x ∈X \ Ω. The signed dis-
tance function (SDF) satisfies the partial differential equa-

the generation/inference. The sampling algorithm is sum-
marized in Algorithm 2.

Noise Function
Generated Function
-
Generating Process

Figure 9. Generating process of SDFs. We show the generating process of 3 samples. In the far left, the initial noise functions are shown.
In the far right, we show the generated samples. To make the visualization clear, we only show the zero-isosurface. However, the functions
are actually densely defined everywhere in the space.

Noise Function
Generated Function
-
Generating Process

Figure 10. Generating process of SDFs. In the top row, we show multiple isosurfaces of each intermediate step of the generating process.
They are [−0.5, −0.2, −0.1, −0.05, −0.01, 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2] from outer to inner. They are cut with a plane to show the inner structure. In
the bottom row, we show the zero-isosurface for comparison.

in this task. We not only output detailed and full meshes but
also show the multimodality of the proposed method. How-
ever, prior works are unable to give correct reconstructions,
thus also proving this task is challenging given the sparse
observation.
We also show some quantitive comparison in Tab. 3.
Chamfer distances and F-scores are commonly used in sur-
face reconstruction evaluation [4, 18, 34, 35]. Furthermore,
we design two new metrics. As discussed above, we are ac-
tually solving a partial differential equation. Thus, we can
define the two metrics,

tion (PDE), a.k.a., Eikonal equation,

|∇f(x)| = 1,

f(x) = q(x), ∀x ∈∂Ω,
(12)

where q(x) is the boundary condition. The task of predict-
ing SDFs given a surface point cloud is equivalent to solving
this PDE with a given boundary condition (the surface point
cloud). This problem is solved in prior works. But most
works focus on surface reconstruction only by predicting
binary occupancies [18, 22, 33, 34] or truncated SDFs [21].
Thus they are not really solving this equation and cannot be
used in some SDF-based applications such as sphere trac-
ing [6]. This is a challenging task according to prior works.
We choose the task to show the capability of the proposed
method.

EIKONAL(f) =
1
|EX |

i∈EX
∥|∇f(xi)| −1∥2 ,
(13)

X

BOUNDARY(f) =
1
|EΩ|

i∈EΩ
∥f(xi) −q(xi)∥2 ,
(14)

X

4.1. Experiment design

where EIKONAL reflects that if the solutions satisfy the
Eikonal equation and BOUNDARY shows if the solutions
satisfy the boundary condition. EX is a set sampled in the
bounding volume which contains 100k points and EΩis a
set sampled on the surface which also contains 100k points.
Our method leads a large margin over existing methods in
all metrics. This is also consistent with what is shown in the
visual comparison.

We choose a sparse observation of the boundary condition
(surface point cloud) which only contains 64 points as the
input of the model. We compare our method with Occ-
Net [18] and the recently proposed 3DShape2VecSet [35].
As an example to show how the proposed method works,
we first show how the noised state is obtained in Fig. 6. The
context is then fed into the denoising network (see Fig. 5).

4.2. Results comparison

4.3. Generating process

We show visual comparisons in Fig. 7.
Apparently, our
method shows a significant advantage over prior methods

In Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, we show the intermediate noised func-
tion obtained during the generating process. Unlike simi-

Source

Seeds

Target
?

Figure 11. Deformation Fields. In the far left, we show the source and target frame along with the sparse correspondence. We show
3 samples generated given the same condition. In each frame, we show the deformation field on the surface. However, to simplify the
visualization, the colors only indicate the magnitudes of deformation while ignoring the directions. The three samples started from different
functions. But in the end, the model outputs almost the same deformation fields.

MSE (×104) ↓

Chamfer ↓F-Score ↑Boundary ↓Eikonal ↓

OccNet
0.166
0.531
0.019
0.032
3DS2VS
0.144
0.608
0.016
0.038
Proposed
0.101
0.707
0.012
0.024

3DS2VS
13.32
Proposed
6.91

Table 4. Quantitative results in deformation field generation.
The numbers are evaluated using minimum squared error between
the predicted deformation and the ground-truth.

Table 3. SDF diffusion results. The task is SDF prediction given
sparse observations on the surface. We show two commonly used
metrics, Chamfer distances and F-scores. Additionally, we show
the two newly proposed metrics based on the definition of partial
differential equations.

6. Conclusions

We proposed a new class of generative diffusion models,
called functional diffusion. In contrast to previous work,
functional diffusion works on samples that are represented
by functions.
We derived the necessary foundations for
functional diffusion and proposed a first implementation
based on the transformer architecture.

lar methods proposed before which predict binary occupan-
cies or truncated SDFs, we can generate raw SDFs directly
which can be directly used in some SDF-based applications.

5. Results: 3D Deformation

Limitations.
During our work, we identified two main
limitations of our method. First, functional diffusion re-
quires a fair amount of resources to train. However, other
diffusion models also share the same issue. We would ex-
pect that significantly more GPUs would be required to train
on large datasets such as Objaverse-XL. Therefore, it may
be interesting to explore cascaded functional diffusion in
future work. Second, our framework has an additional pa-
rameter, the sampling rate of the sampled function represen-
tation. During training, it is beneficial but also necessary to
explore this hyperparameter.

The task is defined as follows: given meshes sampled in
a dynamic shape sequence, and limited (32) sparse corre-
spondence between two meshes (see Fig. 8), we want to
predict a deformation field. Specifically, the deformation
field takes a point on the surface of the source frame as in-
put and outputs a deformation vector which should map the
point to the target frame. The network design is similar to
the Fig. 5. However, we only use 16384 points in the con-
text set because the data is simpler than a complicated SDF.
We also adapt the method 3DS2VS here to do the deforma-
tion field prediction. From the visual results in Fig. 8, we
can see that our method can show vivid surface deforma-
tion, while 3DS2VS is unable to map source points to the
target frame especially when the motion is large. We also
show the quantitative comparisons in Tab. 4.
In Fig. 11, we show what the generated deformation
fields look like. Given the same condition, three sampling
processes are visualized.

Future works.
In future work, we also would like to ex-
plore the application of functional diffusion to time-varying
phenomena, such as deforming, growing, and 3D textured
objects. Furthermore, we would like to explore functional
diffusion in the field of functional data analysis (FDA) [31]
which studies data varying over a continuum.

References

[15] Tianyang Li, Xin Wen, Yu-Shen Liu, Hua Su, and Zhizhong
Han. Learning deep implicit functions for 3d shapes with
dynamic code clouds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
12840–12850, 2022. 3
[16] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan
Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast ode solver for diffusion
probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5775–5787,
2022. 2
[17] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongx-
uan Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver++: Fast solver for guided
sampling of diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.01095, 2022. 2
[18] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-
bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks:
Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 4460–4470, 2019. 3, 7
[19] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
3
[20] Norman
Müller,
Yawar
Siddiqui,
Lorenzo
Porzi,
Samuel Rota Bulo,
Peter Kontschieder,
and Matthias
Nießner.
Diffrf:
Rendering-guided 3d radiance field
diffusion.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages
4328–4338, 2023. 2
[21] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard
Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning con-
tinuous signed distance functions for shape representation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pages 165–174, 2019. 3, 7
[22] Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc
Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger.
Convolutional occupancy
networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceed-
ings, Part III 16, pages 523–540. Springer, 2020. 3, 7
[23] Ryan Po, Wang Yifan, and Vladislav Golyanik et al. State of
the art on diffusion models for visual computing. In arxiv,
2023. 3
[24] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis.
Physics informed deep learning (part i): Data-driven so-
lutions of nonlinear partial differential equations.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.10561, 2017. 3
[25] Severi Rissanen, Markus Heinonen, and Arno Solin. Gener-
ative modelling with inverse heat dissipation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.13397, 2022. 2
[26] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 1, 2
[27] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala
Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour,

[1] Arpit Bansal, Eitan Borgnia, Hong-Min Chu, Jie S Li,
Hamid Kazemi, Furong Huang, Micah Goldblum, Jonas
Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
Cold diffusion: Inverting
arbitrary image transforms without noise.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.09392, 2022. 2
[2] Hansheng Chen, Jiatao Gu, Anpei Chen, Wei Tian, Zhuowen
Tu, Lingjie Liu, and Hao Su. Single-stage diffusion nerf:
A unified approach to 3d generation and reconstruction. In
ICCV, 2023. 2
[3] Yen-Chi Cheng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Alexan-
der G Schwing, and Liang-Yan Gui. Sdfusion: Multimodal
3d shape completion, reconstruction, and generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 4456–4465, 2023. 1, 2, 3
[4] Boyang Deng, Kyle Genova, Soroosh Yazdani, Sofien
Bouaziz, Geoffrey Hinton, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Cvxnet:
Learnable convex decomposition.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 31–44, 2020. 7
[5] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27:2672–2680,
2014. 2
[6] John C Hart. Sphere tracing: A geometric method for the
antialiased ray tracing of implicit surfaces. The Visual Com-
puter, 12(10):527–545, 1996. 7
[7] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2, 3
[8] Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang,
Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P Kingma, Ben
Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen
video: High definition video generation with diffusion mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022. 1
[9] Jonathan Ho, Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, David J Fleet,
Mohammad Norouzi, and Tim Salimans. Cascaded diffusion
models for high fidelity image generation. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 23(1):2249–2281, 2022. 1, 2
[10] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William
Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video dif-
fusion models. arXiv:2204.03458, 2022. 1
[11] Ka-Hei Hui, Ruihui Li, Jingyu Hu, and Chi-Wing Fu. Neural
wavelet-domain diffusion for 3d shape generation. In SIG-
GRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers, pages 1–9, 2022. 1
[12] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.
Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 35:26565–26577, 2022. 2, 3
[13] Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan
Ho. Variational diffusion models. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, 34:21696–21707, 2021. 3
[14] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-
tional bayes. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2014. 2

Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep
language understanding.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022. 1, 2
[28] Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho.
Progressive distillation
for fast sampling of diffusion models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.00512, 2022. 3
[29] Jiaming
Song,
Chenlin
Meng,
and
Stefano
Ermon.
Denoising diffusion implicit models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502, 2020. 2, 5
[30] Jiapeng Tang, Jiabao Lei, Dan Xu, Feiying Ma, Kui Jia,
and Lei Zhang. Sa-convonet: Sign-agnostic optimization of
convolutional occupancy networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 6504–6513, 2021. 3
[31] Jane-Ling Wang, Jeng-Min Chiou, and Hans-Georg Müller.
Functional data analysis. Annual Review of Statistics and its
application, 3:257–295, 2016. 8
[32] Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany,
Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico Tombari, James Tomp-
kin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in
visual computing and beyond. Computer Graphics Forum,
2022. 3
[33] Xingguang Yan, Liqiang Lin, Niloy J Mitra, Dani Lischin-
ski, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Hui Huang.
Shapeformer:
Transformer-based shape completion via sparse representa-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6239–6249,
2022. 3, 7
[34] Biao Zhang, Matthias Nießner, and Peter Wonka. 3dilg: Ir-
regular latent grids for 3d generative modeling. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21871–21885,
2022. 7
[35] Biao Zhang, Jiapeng Tang, Matthias Nießner, and Peter
Wonka.
3dshape2vecset: A 3d shape representation for
neural fields and generative diffusion models. ACM Trans.
Graph., 42(4), 2023. 1, 2, 3, 7
[36] Xin-Yang Zheng, Hao Pan, Peng-Shuai Wang, Xin Tong,
Yang Liu, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Locally attentional sdf
diffusion for controllable 3d shape generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.04461, 2023. 1
[37] Peiye Zhuang, Samira Abnar, Jiatao Gu, Alex Schwing,
Joshua M. Susskind, and Miguel Ángel Bautista. Diffusion
probabilistic fields. In The Eleventh International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2023. 2, 4