Md. Rafiul Biswas
College of Science and Engineering

Ashhadul Islam
College of Science and Engineering

Zubair Shah
College of Science and Engineering

Hamad Bin Khalifa University

Hamad Bin Khalifa University

Hamad Bin Khalifa University

Doha, Qatar
0000-0001-7389-3274

Wajdi Zaghouani Samir Brahim Belhaouari
College of Humanities and Social Sciences College of Science and Engineering
Hamad Bin Khalifa University Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar Doha, Qatar

Doha, Qatar
0000-0002-5145-1990

Doha, Qatar
0000-0002-9717-3252

0000-0003-1521-5568 0000-0003-2336-0490

ChatGPT leverages a wide array of use cases across various
sectors, redefining communication, problem-solving, and
engagement. Even though there are other LLMs, such as
Google Bard, Meta, Llama2, and so on, ChatGPT has been
unbeaten due to its human-like responses in more than 50
languages [6]. In contrast to earlier chatbots, ChatGPT
possesses the ability to recall the user's previous statements
during a conversation, facilitating seamless dialogue [7].
Moreover, ChatGPT has undergone significant enhancements,
allowing users to input both text and visual images
concurrently. The recent release of GPT turbo-3.5 has enabled
the developer and researcher to fine-tune the GPT 3.5 model
[8]. The fine-tuned model will optimize the ChatGPT for
specific tasks by enhancing its efficiency and ensuring
accuracy. For example, fine-tuned models have the potential
to bring significant improvements to various domains such as
customer service, medical diagnoses, content writing, aid in
education, and ethical decision-making [9], [10]. It's important
to note that while Turbo GPT-3.5 can be a valuable tool in
medical chatbots, it should complement, not replace, the
expertise of trained healthcare professionals.

Abstract—The advanced large language model (LLM)
ChatGPT has shown its potential in different domains and
remains unbeaten due to its characteristics compared to other
LLMs. This study aims to evaluate the potential of using a fine-
tuned ChatGPT model as a personal medical assistant in the
Arabic language. To do so, this study uses publicly available
online questions and answering datasets in Arabic language.
There are almost 430K questions and answers for 20 disease-
specific categories. GPT-3.5-turbo model was fine-tuned with a
portion of this dataset. The performance of this fine-tuned
model was evaluated through automated and human evaluation.
The automated evaluations include perplexity, coherence,
similarity, and token count. Native Arabic speakers with
medical knowledge evaluated the generated text by calculating
relevance, accuracy, precision, logic, and originality. The overall
result shows that ChatGPT has a bright future in medical
assistance.

Keywords—ChatGPT, fine-tuning, medical bot, LLM, Arabic

I.
INTRODUCTION
A chatbot is designed to communicate with users, either
through text or spoken language, often with the goal of
providing information, answering questions, or assisting with
tasks [1]. In the context of the Arabic language, chatbots have
proven to be valuable tools by allowing users to interact in
their preferred language. Arabic chatbots can assist in various
sectors, including customer service, education, and marketing,
by providing information, answering queries, and offering
support [2]. However, it requires the processing of large
amounts of Arabic corpora for effective output, and the dialect
of the Arabic language varies from country to country, which
is a challenge to build an Arabic chatbot. Also, there is a
limited representation of Arabic chatbots targeting healthcare
professionals primarily involved in tasks such as patient intake
automation and aiding in triage and diagnosis [3]. Moreover,
healthcare data is highly sensitive, and ensuring robust
security measures to protect patient privacy is paramount.
Therefore, the creation of healthcare-focused chatbots
demands a careful and comprehensive approach to address
privacy issues effectively.

This study explores the capability of fine-tuned LLM on
medical datasets in the Arabic language. It uses the extensive
Arabic Healthcare Question & Answering (Q&A) dataset
(MAQA), comprising over 430k questions across 20 medical
specializations [11]. This is the largest collection for medical
Q&A in the Arabic language so far and is used as a medical
bot [12]. We have used the MAQA dataset for test purposes,
which allows us to explore the capability of ChatGPT by
engaging with different datasets and different languages. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the dataset. Section 3 describes the methodology. Section 4
describes the results. Section 5 elaborates on the discussions
through outcome analysis and limitations.

II.
DATASET DESCRIPTION
The dataset contains over 430,000 questions distributed
across 20 medical specializations. The questions were
collected from various online websites. The data is stored in
an SQLite database and is publicly available [11]. The MAQA
corpus is a substantial collection of healthcare-related Q&A in
the Arabic language, suitable for tasks like bot development,
question answering, text classification, and word embedding
models. There are six columns for each data: q_body, a_body,
q_body_count, a_body_count, category, category_id. The
q_body is the questions asked by patients, and the a_body is
the answer provided by the healthcare professionals. The
questions and answers both are in Arabic. Table 1 describes
dataset attributes, and Figure 1 shows the number of Q&A per
disease contained in the dataset.

ChatGPT, the latest innovation by OpenAI in Large
Language Model (LLM), has emerged as a transformative tool
across diverse domains [4]. The continuous development of
the LLM model has extended the capabilities of ChatGPT far
beyond its initial design, allowing users to enter a new era of
AI-powered collaboration and innovation across a spectrum of
industries and disciplines. ChatGPT can be used for different
purposes, such as text generation, image generation, and audio
file conversation [5]. Through its adept understanding of
human language and context across multiple languages,

Column
Paraphrased in English

q_body: questions asked by
patients

My sister was born and lost the fetus.
What do you do with the milk? Does
she express or leave it? And if she
leaves it, will it affect her in the long run
with breast cancer?

a_body: answer provided by
doctor

Treatment must be taken to stop the
milk, and pumping must be done until it
stops

Fig 2. JSONL file

B. Prompt Engineering

q_body_count: word counts
21

Prompt engineering bears significant importance in
getting optimized results, particularly in the medical sector, as
it involves deliberately designing input prompts to guide the
model toward desired outputs [13]. This process allows for the
creation of realistic patient scenarios, the generation of diverse
multiple-choice questions, and explanations of complex
medical concepts. We designed three prompts: ‘system’,
‘user’ and ‘assistant’. The ‘system’ prompt is used to guide
how the chatbot will function. The ‘user’ prompt is used to
ask questions to ‘assistant’ prompt. The ‘assistant’ prompt
provides answers to ‘user’ prompt. We used ‘q_body’ as the
user prompt and ‘a_body’ as the assistant prompt. Figure 3
shows an example of the prompt.

a_body_count: word counts
9

category: disease category
Gynecological

category_id: disease id
15

Hematology

Plastic surgery

Respiratory

Endocrine

Malignant and benign

Ear, nose and throat

Eye diseases

General surgery

Heart and arterial

Psychological and…

Pediatric diseases

Dentistry

Sexual

Gastrointestinal

Fig. 3. Example of Prompt

Internal diseases

General Medicine

We evaluated the prompt by comparing the message body of
the assistant prompt with the original answer. The answers
generated by the fine-tuned model were specific to the disease
and similar to the original answer. However, we found that
answers generated without a fine-tuned model were generic
replies for disease and descriptive analysis. This experiment
was performed as a test case on the small data set, expecting
that it would reflect on the large and diverse dataset.

Dermatology

muscles, bones and…

Urinary

Gynecological

0
50
100
150

Thousands

C. File Upload

We chose Gynecological disease (category 15) for the
experiment because it is the largest sample, having 103,683 Q
& A. We randomly selected 4000 Q&A for training purposes
and 1000 Q&A for validation purposes from Gynecological
disease. We uploaded JSONL files to OpenAI's file endpoint
along with the OpenAI API key in the system environment
variables for authentication. The larger the number of training
datasets, the better performance of the fine-tuned model.
However, fine-tuning models with large datasets increases the
token size. Eventually, it will be expensive for larger sets of
tokens.

Fig. 1. Number of Q&A for each disease

A. Ethical Consideration

The use of conversational AI for healthcare raises
important ethical considerations. Preserving patient privacy is
of utmost importance, requiring the anonymization of data and
the implementation of secure access controls. It also requires
consent patient from before collecting data or using it for
conversations. In the context of this research, the dataset was
sourced from publicly available websites [11], with no patient
information disclosed, and so no consent was obtained for its
usage. Therefore, ethical considerations were not applicable,
as the results do not expose patients' identities.

D. Model Fine-tuning

Fine-tuning GPT models can improve model performance
for specific tasks, but designing effective prompts requires
time and effort, breaking tasks into smaller steps, and
measuring accuracy [15]. Initially, we uploaded preprocessed
training data using the OpenAI API key to the GPT-turbo-3.5.
Then, we created a fine-tuned job ID by making the API call.

III.
METHODOLOGY

A. Preparation of Data for Finetuning

The original dataset remained in SQL database format. We
extracted the data from the database to a CSV file. We cleaned
the dataset by keeping only Arabic text and removing

IV. RESULTS AND EVALUATION

Fig.5. Perplexity Score

The OpenAI API allows for training using both training
and validation datasets, offering loss figures for both
throughout the training process [14]. These metrics serve as
an initial indicator of the model's progress, especially when
contrasted with outputs from the base model on equivalent test
conversations. The model was trained for three epochs, and
the recorded training loss of 0.3355 is shown in Figure 4. It
implies that the training loss was going down with more data
and the number of epochs. To evaluate the performance of
fine-tuned GPT turbo 3.5, we performed two analyses:
automated and human evaluation.

Similarity Score: The similarity score compares content,
meaning, or characteristics between two pieces of text [17]. A
higher similarity score implies increased proximity to the
original text. In the medical domain, a higher similarity score
is preferred. There are different ways to measure similarity
scores such as cosine similarity, Jaccard similarity score, TF-
IDF similarity, and others. We performed cosine similarity
between the original answer and the generated answer. In the
context of NLP, cosine similarity is often used to measure the
similarity between vectors representing the distribution of
words in a given space (such as word embeddings). The
formula for computing the cosine similarity between two
vectors, A and B, is as follows:

..0

cosine similarity(𝐴, 𝐵) =

||.||.||0|| (2)

Figure 6 depicts cosine similarity. The fine-tuned model
average similarity score was measured at 0.10. A cosine
similarity score of 0.10 suggests a relatively low level of
similarity on average between the vectors. This could imply
that the representations generated by the fine-tuned model are
not very similar across the dataset or context being considered.

Fig. 4. Training Loss

A. Automated Evaluation

We compared the generated answer with the original
answer. We observed the Perplexity score, ROUGHE score,
Coherence score, and Count of the token.

Perplexity Score: Perplexity score is widely used in
natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning to
evaluate the performance of language models on the
generalization of text based on the training dataset. It
quantifies how well a probability distribution or probability
model to predict unfamiliar or previously unseen data [16].
Mathematically Perplexity Score is calculated as:

𝑃𝑃(𝑊) = 2!!

" ∑
#$%# &(($,(#,(%,………,($&!)
"
$'!
(1)

•
𝑃𝑃(𝑊) = 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑜𝑛 𝑎 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑊.
•
N = total number of words in the dataset
•
𝑤,- i-th word in the dataset
•
P(wi∣w1,w2,...,wi−1) = probability assigned model

Fig. 6. Similarity score

Coherence Score: Coherence score is used to measure
how well the text in a topic relates to each other [18].
Coherence scores 0 (low coherence) and 1 (high coherence)
are relative measures used to assess the quality of topics
within a topic model. A higher coherence score represents the
model's ability to generate consistent, clear, and relevant text.
The average coherence score for the test dataset was measured
at 0.3336. This score indicates the coherence or
interpretability of the topics generated by the model, and it is
not a direct measure of the percentage of texts related to the

A lower perplexity score indicates that the model's predictions
are confident and precise, whereas a higher perplexity score
suggests that the model's predictions are uncertain and less
accurate. Figure 5 shows the perplexity score obtained for the
test dataset. The average perplexity score was measured 13.96
which signifies model is moderately confident and precise to
the uncertainty in predicting each word in a sequence.

Fine-tuned Model vs. Core GPT 3.5 Model: We
generated text for the same question by using the GPT 3.5
model and fine-tuned model. Notably, it's evident that the
GPT 3.5 model tends to produce a higher count (50 to 200) of
tokens compared to the original answer (0 to 50).
Interestingly, the number of tokens generated by the fine-
tuned model is closer to the original answer. This states that
the fine-tuned model is learning and can perform better if the
training datasets are sufficient. Figure 7 shows the
comparative analysis.

Precision: It describes if the generated answers are
specific, precise, and unambiguous. It has a mode of 2 and a
median of 4, suggesting a wide range of assessments. The
mean precision score is 3.22, indicating a slightly negatively
skewed distribution. The standard deviation (1.217) is
relatively high, suggesting greater variability in precision
scores compared to relevance.

Originality: It checks whether the generated text creates
new insights and avoids repeated information. The mode of 4
(good) also indicates that 4 (good) is the most frequent value
for the originality score. The median and mean are also both
4, indicating that the originality scores are very concentrated
around 4. The standard deviation of 0.913 is similar to the
standard deviation for logic, indicating that the originality
scores are also not very spread out around the mean.

original answer
core gpt 3.5 model
fine-tuned model

250

200

Logic: It shows if the conveyed idea adheres to coherent
and logical reasoning. The mean, mode, and median of 4
(good) indicate that the generated text is good and keeps sound
logical reasoning. It means the generated answer bears fruitful
meaning to the questions. The standard deviation of 0.892 is
relatively small, indicating that the values are not very spread
out around the mean.

150

100

50

0

12

23

34

45

56

67

78

89

1

100

111

122

133

144

155

166

177

188

199

210

221

232

243

254

265

276

287

298

Fig.7. GPT 3.5 vs fine-tuned model

V.
DISCUSSIONS
This study fine-tuned the GPT turbo 3.5 model on a
comprehensive Arabic Healthcare Question & Answering
(Q&A) dataset (MAQA) and reveal the promising capabilities
of this fine-tuned model as a personalized medical assistant in
the Arabic language. Here, we discuss the implications of
these findings, emphasizing the model's potential in providing
tailored medical information and assistance.

B. Human Evaluation

To evaluate the performance of the fine-tuned model, we
took help from two medical professionals who were native
Arabic speakers. They labeled 500 generated text based on the
following criteria. Each generated text can be labeled +1 (very
bad), +2 (bad), +3 (acceptable), +4 (good) and +5 (very good).
Each generated text was compared to its original answer. We
measured the inter-annotator's agreement on the labeled data
using Cohen's Kappa. We compared all the pairwise
combinations of the annotator's agreement and found the
average of the result, which was 0.6377. We followed the
study [19] for generating benchmark criteria for the generated
text. Table 2 shows the descriptive analysis.

One of the standout observations from our study is the
fine-tuned model's ability to generate responses that are
remarkably close in token count to the original answers. This
suggests a high degree of learning and adaptation, essential
traits for a reliable medical assistant. When the model's
training dataset is sufficiently rich and diverse, it demonstrates
the capacity to understand and generate content that aligns
closely with the authoritative medical information [20].

TABLE II.
DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS

Our automated evaluation of the fine-tuned model
includes various metrics such as perplexity, similarity score,
and coherence score. The low perplexity score (13.96)
indicates that the model excels at generalizing text based on
its training data, enhancing its ability to provide precise and
confident answers. Furthermore, the cosine similarity score,
though modest (0.10), can be viewed as a positive sign, as it
aligns with the expected low similarity in medical responses,
where diversity is often encouraged to address a wide range of
patient scenarios [21].

Mode
Median
Mean
Std. dev
Relevance
2.000
3.000
3.000
1.107
Precision
2.000
4.000
3.220
1.217
Logic
4.000
4.000
3.980
0.892
Originality
4.000
4.000
3.940
0.913
Accuracy
4.000
4.000
4.100
0.863

Relevance: It observes if the generated answer is relevant
to the question. The mode of 2 (bad) for relevance scores
indicates that much of the generated text by the fine-tuned
model is not relevant to the original answer. The mean and
median of 3 (acceptable) indicates that the average relevance
score is acceptable. The standard deviation of 1.107 indicates
that the values are somewhat spread out around the mean and
indicates moderate agreement among the assessors regarding
relevance.

The human evaluation component of our study enlisted the
expertise of native Arabic-speaking medical professionals.
Notably, the model achieved high scores for accuracy, with a
mode, median, and mean all at 4.0, reflecting a strong
consensus among assessors regarding the model's capacity to
provide
accurate
medical
information.
This
finding
underscores the potential of the fine-tuned model as a reliable
and trustworthy medical resource. Although relevance and
precision received slightly lower scores (mode of 2 for

Accuracy: It denotes if the generated answer belongs to
accurate information and it can be verified through evidence
or other means. Accuracy stands out with a mode, median, and

[1]
B. J. Cahn, “CHATBOT : Architecture , Design , & Development,”
2017.
[2]
A. Ahmed, N. Ali, M. Alzubaidi, W. Zaghouani, A. Abd-alrazaq, and
M. Househ, “Arabic chatbot technologies: A scoping review,” Comput.
Methods Programs Biomed. Updat., vol. 2, p. 100057, 2022, doi:
10.1016/j.cmpbup.2022.100057.
[3]
L. T. Car et al., “Conversational agents in health care: Scoping review
and conceptual analysis,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 22, no. 8, 2020,
doi: 10.2196/17158.
[4]
Y. K. Dwivedi et al., “‘So what if ChatGPT wrote it?’ Multidisciplinary
perspectives on opportunities, challenges and implications of
generative conversational AI for research, practice and policy,” Int. J.
Inf.
Manage.,
vol.
71,
no.
March,
2023,
doi:
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102642.
[5]
Q. Lu, B. Qiu, L. Ding, L. Xie, and D. Tao, “Error Analysis Prompting
Enables Human-Like Translation Evaluation in Large Language
Models: A Case Study on ChatGPT,” 2023, [Online]. Available:

[6]
Y. Bang et al., “A Multitask, Multilingual, Multimodal Evaluation of
ChatGPT on Reasoning, Hallucination, and Interactivity,” 2023,
[Online]. Available:
[7]
T. Wu et al., “A Brief Overview of ChatGPT: The History, Status Quo
and Potential Future Development,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin., vol.
10, no. 5, pp. 1122–1136, 2023, doi: 10.1109/JAS.2023.123618.
[8]
“Fine-tuning.”

(accessed Sep. 09, 2023).
[9]
A. Lecler, L. Duron, and P. Soyer, “Revolutionizing radiology with
GPT-based models: Current applications, future possibilities and
limitations of ChatGPT,” Diagn. Interv. Imaging, vol. 104, no. 6, pp.
269–274, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.diii.2023.02.003.
[10] S. S. Biswas, “Role of Chat GPT in Public Health,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,

VI.
LIMITATIONS
While this study presents a potential analysis of using a
fine-tuned model as a medical assistant, it has certain
limitations. The training and evaluation datasets comprise
online question-answer forums, which may not fully capture
the
nuances
of
real-world
doctor-patient
dialogues.
Performance on direct clinical conversations remains
untested. Many of the original answers in the dataset lack
sufficient explanation, which impacts the performance of the
fine-tuned model. Therefore, it is recommended to utilize a
larger dataset sourced from hospitals to address these
limitations effectively. The relatively small sample size for
training (4000 examples) limits model exposure to diverse
medical vocabulary and conversational patterns. More
training data would be ideal. However, fine-tuning with a
large dataset results in an increased number of tokens, leading
to higher costs when using the OpenAI API. Additionally,
there is a limitation on the number of tokens that can be used
per training cycle. Consequently, while there is potential for
ChatGPT to serve as a personalized medical assistant,
questions arise regarding the practicality of using it
extensively in the medical domain, especially in terms of
resource requirements.

vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 868–869, 2023, doi: 10.1007/s10439-023-03172-7.
[11] A. M. Mohammed Abdelhay, “MAQA: Medical Arabic Q&A

Dataset,” 2022, doi: 10.7910/DVN/Y2JBEZ.
[12] M. Abdelhay, A. Mohammed, and H. A. Hefny, “Deep Learning

approach for Arabic Healthcare: MedicalBot Deep Learning for Arabic
Healthcare:MedicalBot,”
pp.
0–24,
[Online].
Available:

[13] T. F. Heston and C. Khun, “Prompt Engineering in Medical

VII. CONCLUSION
This preliminary study shows the potential of using fine-
tuned LLMs for medical assistance applications in Arabic. Its
performance in terms of accuracy and logical reasoning
positions it as a valuable tool for providing trustworthy
medical guidance. While there is room for further refinement,
these findings emphasize the model's potential in offering
personalized medical support and information to individuals,
enhancing access to healthcare knowledge. Future work
should focus on constructing high-quality conversational
datasets from hospital and clinic interactions to better cover
the nuances of professional medical dialogues. Additionally,
ensemble approaches combining retrieval models with
generative LLMs could boost overall performance. Rigorous
testing on practical clinical deployments encompassing
diverse medical conversations and user populations would be
vital before large-scale adoption in real-world healthcare
scenarios.

Education,” Int. Med. Educ., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 198–205, 2023, doi:
10.3390/ime2030019.
[14] T. Z. Zhao, E. Wallace, S. Feng, D. Klein, and S. Singh, “Calibrate

Before Use: Improving Few-Shot Performance of Language Models,”
Proc. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 139, pp. 12697–12706, 2021.
[15] A. Y. Sun et al., “Does fine-tuning GPT-3 with the OpenAI API leak

personally-identifiable information?,” 2023, [Online]. Available:

[16] F. Jelinek, R. L. Mercer, L. R. Bahl, and J. K. Baker, “Perplexity—a

measure of the difficulty of speech recognition tasks,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., vol. 62, no. S1, pp. S63–S63, 1977, doi: 10.1121/1.2016299.
[17] N. Dehak, R. Dehak, J. Glass, D. Reynolds, and P. Kenny, “Cosine

similarity scoring without score normalization techniques,” Odyssey
2010 Speak. Lang. Recognit. Work., pp. 71–75, 2010.
[18] D. Newman, J. H. Lau, K. Grieser, and T. Baldwin, “Automatic

evaluation of topic coherence,” NAACL HLT 2010 - Hum. Lang.
Technol. 2010 Annu. Conf. North Am. Chapter Assoc. Comput.
Linguist. Proc. Main Conf., no. June, pp. 100–108, 2010.
[19] T. Susnjak, “ChatGPT: The End of Online Exam Integrity?,” pp. 1–21,

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the voluntary work for data labeling by
two native Arabic speakers Bouthaina Gasmi and Hagar
Mohamed Hussein. This publication was partially funded by
NPRP grants 14C-0916-210015 and NPRP13S-0206-200281
from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar
Foundation).
The
findings
herein
are
solely
the
responsibility of the authors.

2022, [Online]. Available:
[20] V. S. Spelmen and R. Porkodi, “A Review on Handling Imbalanced

Data,” Proc. 2018 Int. Conf. Curr. Trends Towar. Converging Technol.
ICCTCT 2018, pp. 1–11, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ICCTCT.2018.8551020.
[21] R. C. Kinga et al., “Appropriateness of ChatGPT in answering heart

failure related questions Ryan,” 2023.