Jingwei Cai†, Zuotong Wu‡§, Sen Peng‡§, Yuchen Wei†, Zhanhong Tan†, Guiming Shi†,
Mingyu Gao†¶∗and Kaisheng Ma†∗

Tsinghua University†, Xi’an Jiaotong University‡, IIISCT§, Shanghai AI Laboratory¶

Corresponding Author∗

with 36 dies [46], have emerged. However, this technology
introduces new challenges for architectural design and DNN
mapping for large-scale chiplet accelerators, which are out-
lined below:
For architecture design, the main challenge is determining
the optimal chiplet granularity. While chiplet technology im-
proves area limits and yield, it introduces higher packaging
expenses and D2D interconnection costs. D2D interconnec-
tions are more energy and area-intensive, but provide lower
bandwidth than on-chip lines. All the above adverse effects
are collectively referred to as Chiplet Costs. Consequently,
A trade-off arises between using more smaller chiplets for
better yield and fewer larger chiplets for lower Chiplet Costs.
Balancing this trade-off remains an unsolved challenge.
For DNN mapping, the main challenges stem from the larger
scale enabled by chiplet technology, and the costly D2D links.
For the first challenge, maintaining high utilization and energy
efficiency becomes increasingly difficult with the growing
scale of accelerators. LP mapping, in which multiple layers
are spatially mapped onto the accelerator, is widely employed
by large-scale accelerators in both academia [15], [45], [46],
[57] and industry [21], [52], [55] to relieve the challenge.
The core of LP mapping is spatial mapping (SPM), which
determines which part of which layer is allocated to which
core, and significantly impacts the performance and energy
efficiency of large-scale accelerators. Despite the importance
of LP SPM, most current strategies are still heuristic [15], [21],
[46], [55], [57]. The problems and optimization space of LP
SPM have not been clearly defined, exhaustively explored, or
fully understood. This limitation constrains the ability to fully
leverage optimization opportunities in LP mapping, which
becomes increasingly important as the scale of accelerators
and the structural complexity of DNNs increase. The second
challenge lies in that D2D links tend to consume more energy
and provide lower bandwidth than on-chip lines. Therefore,
devising spatial mapping strategies that can automatically
reduce D2D communications is vital for enhancing chiplet
accelerator performance and efficiency, and fully harnessing
the benefits provided by chiplet technology. However, there
is a noticeable absence of such approaches in the existing
literature.
The above analysis reveals that the employment of chiplet
technology introduces intricate trade-offs and challenges.

Abstract—Chiplet technology enables the integration of an
increasing number of transistors on a single accelerator with
higher yield in the post-Moore era, addressing the immense
computational demands arising from rapid AI advancements.
However, it also introduces more expensive packaging costs and
costly Die-to-Die (D2D) interfaces, which require more area,
consume higher power, and offer lower bandwidth than on-
chip interconnects. Maximizing the benefits and minimizing the
drawbacks of chiplet technology is crucial for developing large-
scale DNN chiplet accelerators, which poses challenges to both
architecture and mapping. Despite its importance in the post-
Moore era, methods to address these challenges remain scarce.
To bridge the gap, we first propose a layer-centric encoding
method to encode Layer-Pipeline (LP) spatial mapping for large-
scale DNN inference accelerators and depict the optimization
space of it. Based on it, we analyze the unexplored optimization
opportunities within this space, which play a more crucial role
in chiplet scenarios. Based on the encoding method and a highly
configurable and universal hardware template, we propose an
architecture and mapping co-exploration framework, Gemini, to
explore the design and mapping space of large-scale DNN chiplet
accelerators while taking monetary cost (MC), performance, and
energy efficiency into account. Compared to the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) Simba architecture with SOTA Tangram LP Mapping,
Gemini’s co-optimized architecture and mapping achieve, on
average, 1.98× performance improvement and 1.41× energy
efficiency improvement simultaneously across various DNNs and
batch sizes, with only a 14.3% increase in monetary cost.
Moreover, we leverage Gemini to uncover intriguing insights
into the methods for utilizing chiplet technology in architecture
design and mapping DNN workloads under chiplet scenarios.
The Gemini framework is open-sourced at
Scheduling-Project/GEMINI-HPCA2024.

arXiv:2312.16436v1 [cs.AR] 27 Dec 2023

I. INTRODUCTION

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) tackle increasingly com-
plex problems, their size and complexity grow rapidly, result-
ing in increased computing and storage demands [9], [10],
[51], [56], [63]. While applying more advanced technology
and enlarging single chip sizes have led to the develop-
ment of many large-scale monolithic accelerators with tens
of billions of transistors [23], [24], [28], [55], the end of
Moore’s Law [35] and limited photomask size pose significant
challenges to further transistor integration.
Chiplet technology, using advanced packaging to combine
small functional dies, offers a promising solution to overcome
these limitations and enable continuous transistor integration.
Chiplet-based DNN inference accelerators, such as Simba

to a very wide spectrum of computational power requirements
across diverse scenarios. (4) We study the property of spatial
mapping, and find that rather than allocating chiplets for each
layer in a gathered manner, gathering clusters with heavy data
transfer together is more important and beneficial.
(4) Compared to the SOTA Simba architecture with Tan-
gram SPM, Gemini’s co-optimized architecture and mapping,
on average, achieve 1.98× performance and 1.41× energy
efficiency simultaneously across various DNNs and batch
sizes, with only 14.3% increase in MC.

II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

A. Trade-offs Introduced by Chiplet

Chiplet technology is fundamentally an advanced packaging
solution. It integrates multiple dies (chiplets) onto a substrate,
which could be an organic substrate [4], [36] or a silicon
interposer [19], [59]. This integration is achieved through
high-density interconnections, allowing the dies to function
collectively as a single chip. This technology offers numerous
benefits, but it also incurs additional costs. In this section, we
discuss the trade-offs of employing chiplet technology.
As shown in Fig. 1, the advantages of introducing chiplets
are fourfold. Firstly, it increases the overall yield of a chip.
By partitioning a large-scale monolithic chip into smaller
chiplets, the overall yield of the chip can be significantly
improved. For example, at the 7nm technology node, the yield
of an 800 mm2 chip and a 200 mm2 chip are approximately
18% and 75%, respectively [13]. Second, it extends the
area limit of a chip, as advanced substrates (e.g., organic
substrates [68] or interposers [19]) have a larger area limit
than monolithic chips (858mm2 [19] of a reticle). Third, it en-
ables heterogeneous integration. Unlike logic circuits, analog
circuit IPs do not significantly benefit from the performance
and density improvements brought about by technological
advancements [4], [16], [37], [53]. Therefore, manufacturing
logic circuits with advanced technologies while producing
various IO-functional analog IPs with more outdated processes
can save on the expensive manufacturing and design and IP-
related costs associated with advanced technologies [4], [16],
[36], [37]. Fourth, the ability to repurpose a single chiplet

Trade-offs Introduced by Chiplet

Higher Yield

Larger Scale

Advantages

Heterogeneous Integration

Reuse for Multiple Chips

(a) 2-Chiplet Chip

Worse Performance

Worse Power

Disadvantages

D2D Area Costs

Higher Packaging Costs

accelerators [14], [18], [20], [26], [29], [30], [33], [41],
[58], [62].However, with the increase in accelerator scale, LS
mapping demonstrates limited scalability [3], [15], [46], [66],
whereas LP mapping exhibits a higher potential. For instance,
Simba employs a naive LP mapping for some blocks of layers
in ResNet-50, achieving approximately a 1.7× throughput
improvement over its original LS approach.

for developing multiple computational chips, each differing
in scale or targeted application, is a significant advantage
of chiplet technology. This approach can substantially reduce
the enormous Non-Recurring Engineering (NRE) costs and
the time traditionally associated with developing different
chips for each scale and scenario. A notable success story
in this regard is AMD’s Zen series CPUs [4], [36]. While the
advantages of chiplet technology are not the main focus of our
research, given our primary emphasis on the architecture of an
accelerator designed for a specific scenario, we do include a
brief case study on this topic in Sec. VII-B for comprehensive
understanding.
Fig.1 also depicts the fourfold disadvantages of chiplets,
all resulting from D2D interfaces. First, they increase energy
consumption, as D2D links consume several to dozens of times
more energy than the less than 0.1 pJ/bit data transfer cost
with on-chip lines [5], [43], [47], [48]. Second, limited inter-
chiplet communication bandwidth may decrease performance.
Compared to sufficient on-chip interconnect resources, inter-
connects between chiplets have limited bandwidth due to the
limited number of IO pins available around each chiplet. Third,
D2D interfaces require more area, as they need a specific
analog PHY and controller, unlike on-chip lines, which occupy
almost no silicon area. Fourth, the need for massive intercon-
nections between chiplets increases packaging substrate costs,
as advanced packaging scenarios require organic substrates
with dozens of layers or silicon interposers, compared to the
basic fan-out substrates sufficient for monolithic chips.
All the trade-offs above influence three facets of a chip:
energy consumption, performance, and MC. It’s particularly
important to emphasize that in the chiplet era, solely consider-
ing the silicon chip area is inadequate for evaluating a chip’s
MC. Factors such as yield and packaging costs also need to be
taken into account. Consequently, designing an efficient DNN
chiplet accelerator requires carefully balancing among these
trade-offs. However, existing works fall short in considering all
these trade-offs simultaneously. Some works [13], [50] focus
on studying the MC of chiplet-based chips, but do not consider
their architectural details and the corresponding influence on
performance and energy consumption. NN-baton [53] focuses
on optimizing energy consumption and performance for small-
scale DNN chiplet accelerators but does not consider the trade-
offs on MC. Furthermore, NN-baton’s ring-based template and
layer-sequential mapping strategies limit its applicability to
small-scale accelerators and restrict its scalability.
The significant potential and intricate trade-offs of applying
chiplet technology to DNN inference accelerators, alongside
the current research void, inspire us to create a framework that
co-explores architecture and mapping for these accelerators.

DNNs can be viewed as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG),
where each layer is a node. In LP mapping, a graph (or
subgraph) can be mapped onto a core array simultaneously,
where different core groups compute different layers. The on-
chip interconnect is responsible for transmitting the feature
maps of layers that share dependencies. SPM determines
which core specifically computes which part of which layers.
As shown in Fig. 3, the top-left corner shows a DNN DAG
containing two layers. In LS mapping, all six cores are used
to compute each layer one by one, whereas in LP mapping,
some of the six cores are used to compute the first layer, and
the remaining cores are used for the second layer. The feature
maps between the two layers can be transferred via the on-chip
network without the need to access DRAM.

While LP mapping presents significant potential, it is less
extensively researched than LS mapping. Most existing studies
employ techniques such as fine-grained pipelining [3], [15]
and temporal merging of some layers or workloads [7],
[66] to reduce the imbalance across different pipeline stages
and mitigate filling and draining overheads in LP. However,
with regard to the SPM part, these studies do not offer
specific optimizations and directly adopt heuristic stripe-based
SPM strategies, which assign each layer to a consecutive
and rectangle-shaped group of cores. The problem and its
corresponding optimization space for LP SPM have not been
clearly defined, let alone thoroughly explored or understood.
It is worth noting that as most existing works also have an
SPM optimization stage, the optimization method proposed in
this work can easily integrate with existing methodologies.
Another significant challenge posed to SPM is mitigating
the adverse effects on energy consumption and performance
introduced by chiplet technology (Fig. 1). Fundamentally,
these negative influences stem from the integration of high-
energy-cost and lower-bandwidth D2D links into the chip.
Consequently, this challenge primarily revolves around reduc-
ing D2D communication automatically for various workloads,
an aspect that is not considered and optimized by existing
heuristic LP SPM strategies [7], [15], [66].

III. SCALABLE HARDWARE TEMPLATE

B. Mapping Challenges

within IO chiplets, allowing for arbitrary core-to-core, core-to-
DRAM, and DRAM-to-core communication. For inter-chiplet
communication, the D2D transmission (TX) within a chiplet
independently encodes the data and forwards it to the corre-
sponding D2D reception (RX) in another chiplet. The D2D RX
decodes the data and proceeds with NoC transmission. This
inter-chiplet communication is fully automatic and transparent
to both the source and the destination.
This heterogeneous architecture allows for arbitrary num-
bers of IO and computing chiplets, ensuring the scalability of
the entire template. Otherwise, if we equip each computing
chiplet with IO-related PHY and controller would occupy the
chip’s edge area and IO pins, which could affect the routing
of D2D links and, consequently, the system’s scalability.
Our hardware template and the corresponding hardware
model in Gemini Framework (see Sec. V) are not limited to
supporting only mesh topology. They can be easily modified
to support various topologies (demonstrated in Sec. VI-B).
However, in order to ensure the signal integrity of the D2D
links, there are limitations on the interconnect distance and
cross-linking, which restricts certain topologies like torus and
butterfly. Therefore, it is preferable to maintain a point-to-point
parallel interconnect, as shown in Fig. 2. Considering these
factors and the fact that most existing tiled accelerators [21],
[46], [52], [64] currently adopt mesh interconnect networks,
we default to using the mesh topology in this paper.
Computing Chiplet Architecture: Each Computing Chiplet
contains an arbitrary number of computing cores intercon-
nected by a mesh NoC. To enhance the scalability of this
template, D2D interfaces are placed around the Chiplet, whose
number is equal to the number of computing cores on each
side. This arrangement enables the Computing Chiplet to

form a larger-scale mesh with other Chiplets. In the example
illustrated in Fig. 2(a), there are four cores on each side, so
we place four D2Ds on each side of the Computing Chiplet.

The computing cores are the key components responsible
for performing calculations in the entire accelerator, and their
architecture is shown in Fig. 2(b). The communication unit
comprises DMA and router, facilitating communication with
other cores and DRAM. The control unit is primarily re-
sponsible for managing computation tasks based on statically-
compiled instructions and task progress information, as well as
managing the reception and transmission of data or messages
to and from external cores or DRAMs. The global buffer
(GLB) of each core is globally visible in the entire accelerator.
Every core can read data from or write data to the GLBs of
other cores, provided the data is valid, or the address can be
written to. The PE array and the vector unit are responsible for
computing the General Matrix Multiply (GEMM)/Convolution
(Conv) and vector/scalar operators, respectively. Each time,
the PE array reads a workload tile’s weight and input feature
maps (ifmaps) from the GLB. The resulting ofmaps/partial
sum (psum) can be directly written back to the GLB or post-
processed within the vector unit (such as Batch Normalization
and ReLU operations). Simultaneously, the vector unit can be
independently invoked to compute vector/scalar operators.

IO Chiplet Architecture: The IO Chiplet is equipped with an
array of IO functionalities, enabling interactions with DRAM,
host systems, or other input sources (e.g., cameras). All input
data from host systems or alternative input sources are first
loaded into DRAM, and then can be loaded and processed
by computing cores. The DRAM controller is also connected
to multiple routers within the entire mesh NoC to match the
bandwidth of the DRAM and the network, ensuring the full
utilization of DRAM bandwidth.

Configurable Parameters: Our template features excellent
configurability, offering a range of adjustable architectural
parameters. These parameters include NoC bandwidth, D2D
bandwidth, total DRAM bandwidth, the total number of cores
in the X-direction (e.g., 8 in Fig. 2), the total number of cores
in the Y-direction (e.g., 8 in Fig. 2), the number of chiplet di-
visions in the X-direction (XCut)(e.g., 2 in Fig. 2), the number
of chiplet divisions in the Y-direction (YCut)(e.g., 2 in Fig. 2),
the number of MACs in the PE array within a single core,
and the size of the GLB per core. It is worth mentioning that
the microarchitecture of the PE array and its corresponding
dataflow have been extensively studied in existing works [8],
[18], [25], [29], [53], [58], [65]. Therefore, in this work, the
PE array adopts the classic NVDLA architecture [39], [58] and
corresponding dataflow to maintain a fair comparison with the
baseline, Simba. Of course, NVDLA can also be replaced by
other microarchitectures with different dataflows, which are
supported by our template.

ifmaps

Core

Control

Unit

weights

Computing Chiplet

PE
Array

D2D Interface

Communi-
cation Unit

Global

IO Chiplet

ofmaps

Buffer

Controller

DMA

DRAM PHY

ofmaps
NoC
Router

ifmaps

params

Other IO PHY

Vector Unit

DRAM

ofmaps

(b) Computing Core

Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap

Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap

Layer 1 Ofmap

DRAM 1

DRAM 2

1-1
1-0
2-0

1
2
3

DRAM 1

DRAM 2

K

L1
L2
Input

Output

workload 1-0: ID(0,0,0,0)

workload 1-1: ID(0,0,0,1)

4
5
6

1-3
1-2
2-1

H W

DRAM 1

LP Mapping

CG1(2, 1, 5, 4)

B

Space

Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap

Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap

A DNN DAG containing

FD1(1, 1, -1)

2 Convs. (LG={L1,L2})

1-1

1-3

Part1(1, 1, 2, 2)

Ifmap Dataflow
Weight Dataflow
Ofmap Dataflow

A point

workload 1-2: ID(0,0,1,0)

workload 1-3: ID(0,0,1,1)

1-2

1-0

MAPPING

LMS (MS1, MS2)

Layer 2 Ofmap

MS1
Part1(1, 1, 2, 2)
CG1(2, 1, 5, 4)
FD1(1, 1, -1)

2-1

2-0

DRAM 1

DRAM 2

1-1
1-0
2-0

Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap
Weight
Ifmap
Ofmap

1
2
3

DRAM 1

DRAM 2

1
2
3

DRAM 1

DRAM 2

DRAM 2

4
5
6

MS2
Part2(1, 1, 2, 1)
CG2(3, 6)
FD2(-1, 2, 2)

4
5
6

1-3
1-2
2-1

CG2(3, 6)
workload 2-0: ID(0,0,0,0) workload 2-1: ID(0,0,1,0)

Parsed Mapping

6 cores with 2 DRAMs.

Part2(1, 1, 2, 1)

FD2(-1, 2, 2)

Scheme

Parti(Hi , Wi , Bi , Ki)
Core Group (CGi)
Correspondence Rule

FDi(Ifi, WGTi, OFi)

Fig. 3. Parsing an Encoded LMS in the LP SPM Optimization Space into an Actual SPM Scheme

IV. LP SPATIAL MAPPING ENCODING

A. Encoding Format and Parsing Methods

In this section, we introduce a layer-centric encoding method
for describing LP SPM schemes. At a high-level, the encoded
LP SPM scheme encapsulates two key aspects of information:
(1) the allocation and partition of each layer to specific cores
for computation, and (2) the data sources and destinations
for the workload on each core. This encoding method ex-
hibits great generality and can adapt seamlessly to diverse
NoC topologies and core microarchitectures (demonstrated
in Sec. VI-B2). Subsequently, we provide a comprehensive
description of our encoding format and the corresponding
parsing method.

DRAM to store or fetch data. In cases where the value is
greater than 0, it represents the ID of the DRAM. Meanwhile,
0 represents a special case - interleaving, where we evenly
distribute data across all DRAMs to fully and evenly utilize
the available bandwidth. For example, as depicted in Fig. 3,
due to layer1 having the input of the whole DNN and weights,
IF1 and WGT1 should be non-negative. FD1 of layer1 in
the example is (1,1,-1), indicating that the ifmaps and weights
of layer1 originate from the DRAM 1.
If both layers sharing dependency are in the same layer
group, the ofmaps of the previous layer and the ifmaps of the
subsequent layer need not be explicitly manipulated because
the destination of each part of the previous layer and the
source of each part of the subsequent layer can be directly
inferred based on the partition schemes and CGs of these
layers. Moreover, for the layers without weights, their WGTi
value would be -1. For example, in Fig. 3, based on Part1,
CG1, Part2, and CG2, the data communication dependency
between cores of layer1 and layer2 can be deduced directly.
Thus, OF1 and IF2 are -1.

Secondly, the number and position of cores can vary in each
CG attribute. The number of cores affects the computation
time of each layer, which in turn influences the overall pipeline
computation time, as the slowest stage can stall the pipeline.
Core positions can significantly impact the data transmission
volume and congestion levels of the NoC.
Third, different FD attributes affect the bandwidth uti-
lization and access patterns of different DRAMs, and NoC
communication. As shown in Fig. 3, the ifmaps and weights
of layer1 are read from DRAM1, while the weight and
ofmaps of layer2 are read from and written into DRAM2,
respectively. In this case, the bandwidth demand and access
patterns for each DRAM are not balanced, but the total NoC
hops are relatively few. If all positive values in FD1 and
FD2 change to 0 (interleaved), DRAM bandwidth usage will
become more balanced. However, the total NoC hops increase
since some data will interact with more remote DRAM.

V. GEMINI FRAMEWORK

A. Gemini Overview

B. Space Calculation

As shown in Fig. 3, each LMS is a point in the opti-
mization space defined by our encoding method. The op-
timization space of mapping N layers onto an accelerator
with a core group containing M cores and D DRAMs
is considerably large and extremely complex to calculate.
Therefore, we conservatively approximate its lower bound

size at m!
N−1
P

N
i
M−N−1
N−i−1

4N−i schemes, where
x
y

is the

i=0

binomial coefficient, which equals
x!
y!(x−y)!. As a comparison,
the upper bound of optimization space of the SOTA heuristic
Tangram is N · part(M), where PartM represents the total
number of possible factorizations for a given integer M. We
can observe that the optimization space defined by our encod-
ing method is significantly larger than the optimization space
of the Tangram heuristic. The detailed calculation procedure
and tables of the optimization space under different M and N
for our method and Tangram can be found at this link [2].

C. Unveil Hidden Optimization Opportunities

LP SPM Exploration Engine

INPUT
Arch Params

Framework

DNN
Models

Graph Level
Partition Engine

Candidates

Settings

Encoded Scheme

Best Graph
Partition Scheme

Partitioned

Model Parser

LP SPM
Analyzer

Workload

Iterator

Extract DNN

SA
Controller

Features

Intra-core
Exploration

Partition

MC Evaluator
Mapping Engine

LP Mapping

Engine

Energy,

Core Group

Monetary

Graph Partition

Generator

Exploration

Delay,
Scheme

Cost

Engine

Flow of Data

Records

Optimal
Scheme

Best
Scheme

Gemini
Framework
Instruction Gen.

Analysis

Graph Partition
Scheme Candidate

Cost
Cost

Analyzed

Tiling,
Loop Order

Cost

Scheme

Evaluator

OUTPUT
Best Arch
Energy&Delay

Report
MC
Instructions

NoC & D2D Traffic
DRAM Access
Intra-core Analysis

Fig. 4. Gemini Framework. The red arrow illustrates the Simulated Annealing (SA) iteration loop.

B. Mapping Engine

assessment. If the overall cost is lower, the change is accepted;
otherwise, it is accepted with a probability which decreases as
the number of iterations increases.

experimental to guarantee a fair comparison.

C. Monetary Cost Evaluator

MC Evaluator can assess the production cost of different
architecture candidates, which mainly includes chiplet silicon
cost, DRAM cost, and packaging cost.
The
evaluation
of
the
silicon
area
for
all
chiplets
(Areatot = Pn
i=1 AreaDiei) serves as a fundamental cor-
nerstone within the MC Evaluator. The chip silicon cost and
packaging cost are directly influenced by this area evaluation,
as shown in the following paragraphs. Each chiplet’s area is
determined by the summation of the areas of its constituent
modules. In this work, the area of analog IPs, such as PCIe
PHY, DDR PHY, and D2D PHY, is obtained directly from
the corresponding datasheets. For the logic modules, their area
estimation is based on the Verilog code and evaluation process
employed during the development of our chip.
The silicon cost of a die (chiplet) is AreaDiei/Y ielddiei ·
Csilicon, where Y ieldDiei = Y ield
AreaDiei/AreaDieunit
unit
[13].
Y ieldunit represents the yield per unit area (AreaDieunit),
where Y ieldunit under 12nm in this paper is assumed to be
0.9, and AreaDieunit is set to 40 mm2.
The DRAM cost is ⌈DRAMbw/Unitbw⌉· CDRAMDie,
where Unitbw and CDRAMDie represent the bandwidth pro-
vided by each DRAM die and the MC of each DRAM die,
respectively. The Unitbw and CDRAMDie used in this work
(GDDR6) are 32GB/s and $3.5 [12].
The packaging cost equals (Areatot ·fscale)/Y ieldpackage ·
Cpackage. Because the substrate requires a larger area than
the total area of all chiplets to accommodate IO fanout and
interconnect wiring functions, there is an empirical scaling
factor fscale to calculate the substrate area based on total
silicon area [13]. Cpackage represents the monetary cost per
unit area of the substrate. The Cpackage for different substrates
varies. For instance, in the case of an organic substrate, without
adopting chiplet technology, a standard fan-out substrate is
relatively inexpensive (0.005$/mm2). However, when chiplet
technology is employed, the price increases due to the need
to support high-density interconnects. Cpackage varies across
different area ranges. Larger substrate areas require more
intricate manufacturing processes, resulting in higher Cpackage.

D. Future Work Grounded on Gemini

of DSE as MC · E · D (as introduced in Sec. V-A). The
default workload is set as Transformer [56] since it is prevalent
and widely used in various scenarios such as image [11] and
language processing [6], [10], [40].
2) DSE Time: The DSE time increases with the increase in
target computing power. For example, the DSE for 72 TOPs
and 512 TOPs use 80 threads and 100 threads, respectively,
and run for 2280s and 23907s on an Intel Xeon Platinum 8260
server.
3) Workloads: To fully demonstrate the advantages of our
architecture and mapping co-exploration, we conduct the com-
parison with the baseline over a wide range of DNNs, includ-
ing ResNet-50 (RN-50) [17], ResNeXt (RNX) [63], Inception-
ResNet (IRes) [51], PNasNet (PNas) [32], and Transformer
(TF) [56]. ResNet-50 and ResNeXt are selected due to their
use of classic residual structures, which are prevalent in many
DNNs. Inception-ResNet-v1 and PNASNet represent DNNs
with more intricate dependencies. Due to the reasons men-
tioned above, we mainly use Transformer as a representative
to showcase various observations and insights, in addition to
overall comparisons.
4) Baseline: The baseline here principally comprises two
components: baseline architecture and baseline mapping. For
the architecture baseline, we adopt Simba [46] and optimize
it accordingly. Since the Simba accelerator is a test chip
lacking DRAM, the configuration of its on-chip buffer is also
impacted. Consequently, we initially equip it with I/O Dies
and furnish a total DRAM bandwidth of 2 GB/s per TOPs.
Concurrently, the on-chip buffer configuration is determined
according to the Simba-series paper [58], which explores the
architecture of an NVDLA-style core. In particular, the GBUF
is allocated 1024 KB per core. The remaining configurations
align with the specifications in the original Simba paper [46].
In experiments, the baseline architecture is abbreviated as S-
Arch, while the architecture explored by our Gemini frame-
work is denoted as G-Arch. Additionally, to demonstrate the
universality of Gemini, we conduct an exploration with a hard-
ware template modified to adopt a folded torus NoC topology.
We compare the explored architecture and mapping scheme
with an accelerator that employs the Tenstorrent Grayskull
architecture parameters [55] (T-Arch) and utilizes Tangram
mapping. This comparison serves to validate the effectiveness
of the Gemini (Sec. VI-B2).
Although Simba has its own layer-sequential mapping [46],
this mapping performs poorly on such a high-computing-
power chip [15], [66]. Therefore, we choose the SOTA Tan-
gram LP mapping strategy as the baseline mapping strategy
(abbr., T-Map). The mapping scheme explored by Gemini
framework is abbreviated as G-Map.

these different optimization dimensions On the architectural
front, the heterogeneity of chiplet presents another compelling
area for research. Questions around scheduling LP mapping
on heterogeneous chiplets and, reciprocally, exploring archi-
tectural designs for heterogeneous accelerators in the context
of LP mapping are of particular interest.

VI. EVALUATION

A. Experiment Setup

1) DSE Configurations: In this work, we conduct DSE on
DNN accelerators with 72 TOPs, 128 TOPs, and 512 TOPs to
show Gemini advantages and gain a deeper understanding of
the design space for DNN chiplet accelerators and the use of
chiplet technology. We choose 72 TOPs instead of 64 TOPs to
enable comparison with the SOTA Simba architecture with 72
TOPs [46]. Table I presents the DSE parameters. By keeping
the total computing power constant, we determine the number
of cores based on the MAC/Core configurations. To maintain
the core array’s length and width as close as possible, we
arrange the cores accordingly. For instance, with 36 cores,
we configure them in a 6×6 arrangement, while for 18 cores,
we adopt a 6×3 configuration. The values of XCut and YCut
must be a factor of the corresponding number of cores on
edge; otherwise, the candidate is deemed invalid.
We choose TSMC 12nm as the default process, which is
also widely used by many commercial accelerators [23], [31],
[38]. We choose organic substrate as the default packaging
substrate, as it is used in many successful commercial [4],
[36], [37] and academic designs [46]. The default operating
frequency is set to 1GHz. For D2D, we use GRS [43], [46]
as default in experiments to guarantee a fair comparison with
Simba.

For the sake of brevity, the explored architectural parameters
are presented as (Chiplet Number, Core Number, DRAMBW ,
NoCBW , D2DBW , GBUF/Core, MAC/Core).

The DSE adopts a batch size of 64, targeting a throughput-
driven scenario, as defined by the MLPerf benchmark [44].
Although the exploration process solely utilizes these two
DNN models with a batch size of 64, we also evaluate addi-
tional DNNs with batch size 1 (latency-centric scenarios) on
the explored architecture, demonstrating its broad applicability
to other scenarios. We set the default optimization objective

TABLE I
DSE PARAMETERS. THE PARAMETERS MARKED IN italics AND BOLD ARE
EXCLUSIVELY USED BY DSE FOR 72TOPS AND 128/512 TOPS
ACCELERATORS, RESPECTIVELY.

XCut
1, 2, 3, 6 (1, 2, 4, 8)
YCut
1, 2, 3, 6 (1, 2, 4, 8)
DRAMBW
0.5, 1, 2 GB/s per TOPs

Accelerator
Config.

B. Overall Comparison

NoCBW
8, 16 ,32, 64, 128 GB/s
D2DBW
NoC/4, NoC/2, NoC

Network
Config.

128TOPs
512TOPs

Delay
Network Energy
Intra-tile Energy
DRAM Energy

Normalized Energy

Normalized Delay

Batch Size = 64
Batch Size = 1

1

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

TF

RN-50

RNX
PNas
IRes

Normalized Energy

Normalized Delay

1

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1

(a) Chiplet Number

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

RN-50

RNX
TF
PNas
IRes

Fig. 5.
Overall Comparisons among G-Arch, G-Map, S-Arch, and T-Map.
energy consumption and delay in each comparison are normalized to overall
baseline S-Arch+T-Map

(b) Core Number

Fig. 6. EDP and MC of the Architecture Candidates in the Design Space for
128 and 512 TOPs Accelerators. Different colors represent various categories
of architectural parameters. To provide a clearer depiction of trends, only
the top 50% of each category is plotted. The EDP and MC of each point
are normalized to the counterpart of the best arch under MC · E · D.
We use triangles pointing in different directions to represent the globally
optimal architectures under different optimization objectives. The workload is
Transformer.

a 14.3% additional MC, demonstrating the value of Gemini
co-exploration. Moreover, by merely employing G-Map on the
S-Arch, a significant reduction delay and energy consumption
can be achieved compared to T-Map. The optimization brought
up by Gemini mapping demonstrates that exploring the vast
space defined by our encoding method can indeed achieve
a better balance of the trade-offs introduced in Sec. IV-C.
The explored G-Arch is (2, 36, 144GB/s, 32GB/s, 16GB/s,
2MB, 1024). Compared to S-Arch, the number of Chiplets
in G-Arch is significantly reduced, while the bandwidths of
NoC and D2D are increased, and the GBUF capacity is
doubled. The reduction in the number of Chiplets leads to a
significant decrease in the proportion of D2D links across all
links, resulting in a substantial reduction in network energy.
With improved interconnect bandwidth and on-chip storage
resources, performance and energy efficiency improvements
are natural. However, the interesting point is that these re-
source improvements only result in a 14.3% increase in
MC. This is mainly because, under S-Arch, there are too
many Chiplets, and an excessive amount of chip area is used
for D2D interfaces (nearly 40%). In G-Arch, this area is
converted into interconnect bandwidth and on-chip storage
resources. However, it is worth noting that Simba serves as
an academic test chip. As a pioneering work in introducing
Chiplets into DNN accelerators, Simba has already showcased
many features of Chiplet-based inference accelerators. Given
that Simba is an academic demo with limited chiplet area
and scale (6 mm2 [68]), its suboptimal chiplet granularity is
understandable. Further insights regarding the optimal choice
of chiplet granularity will be discussed in Section VII-A1.

480 GB/s, 64GB/s, 32GB/s, 2MB, 2048). Compare with T-
Arch with T-Map, G-Arch with G-Map achieves 1.74× perfor-
mance and 1.13× energy efficiency, and reduces 40.1% MC,
which demonstrates the effects and universality of Gemini.

VII. DISCUSSION

A. Design Space Exploration

1) Chiplet Granularity: As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), the
optimal number of chiplets for 128 TOPs and 512 TOPs,
under the four different objectives, ranges from 1 to 4 and
2 to 4, respectively. Moreover, it is evident from both DSEs
that an excessively fine-grained chiplet granularity negatively
impacts MC, energy consumption, and performance. Combin-
ing it with the analysis in comparing G-Arch and S-Arch
in Sec. VI-B, we can achieve an insight: Partitioning DNN
accelerators into chiplets with moderate granularity can
effectively strike a balance among MC, energy consumption,
and performance. Conversely, an excessively fine-grained
approach to chiplet partitioning can have a negative impact
on all three metrics—performance, energy consumption, and
MC—simultaneously.

2) Core Granularity: In addition to the granularity of
chiplets, the granularity of cores is also an important topic
in many-core architectures. Particularly in the context of LP
mapping, the trade-offs associated with varying core granular-
ities have yet to be explored. This section aims to address this
gap in the literature.

B. Reuse A Single Chiplet for Multiple Accelerators

is necessary to increase network bandwidth or buffer capacity
per core. The more cores there are, the more these resources
multiply, leading to greater area overhead. However, from the
perspective of EDP, it initially decreases with an increase in
the number of cores, then rises again later. For example, in
the 128 TOPs scenario, the EDP for the yellow and green
points is better than that for the red and blue points. This
intriguing phenomenon warrants further analysis to understand
the underlying trade-offs.

One significant advantage of utilizing chiplets in the industry
lies in their reusability across accelerators of varying scales.
This approach has already been successfully employed in
CPUs [4], [36], [37]. Despite its promise, this potential benefit
has yet to be explored within the realm of DNN inference
accelerators. This section aims to bridge this gap using Gemini
Framework.

Figure 8 reveals that the performance of accelerators con-
structed with Simba chiplets is poor for both 128 TOPs and
512 TOPs configurations, with the latter faring even worse.
This example illustrates the failure of a “one-size-fits-all” ap-
proach, highlighting the impracticality of designing a small-
scale chiplet to cover an extensively wide range of scenarios.
Additionally, although using chiplets from the best 128 TOPs
accelerator in the 512 TOPs accelerator yields better results
than Simba, the overall performance is still unsatisfactory, and
vice versa. This example, in conjunction with the Simba case,
collectively illustrates that directly repurposing chiplets from
one computing platform to build another is ill-advised and
frequently results in less-than-ideal outcomes.

A main advantage of LP Mapping is to reduce DRAM
accesses, which is a key factor contributing to improvements
in both energy consumption and performance. Under LP Map-
ping, an increased number of cores facilitates longer pipelines,
allowing for the simultaneous processing of more layers. This,
in turn, enables more dependency data to be transferred and
processed on-chip, thereby reducing costly DRAM accesses.
However, not all dependencies have the same amount of
data. Layers involving links with larger data volumes will
be prioritized for simultaneous processing. Therefore, the
reduction in DRAM access due to the increase in the number
of layers processed simultaneously diminishes at a slower
rate. Moreover, as the pipeline depth increases, so does the
utilization loss due to the filling and draining phases [15],
[66]. In summary, a longer pipeline is not necessarily better.
The diminishing benefits from extending the pipeline and the
escalating costs eventually reach a point of equilibrium, which
represents the optimal pipeline length. As evidence, in Fig. 7,
the number of cores for the optimal solutions under the four
different objectives, from left to right, are 16, 8, 32, and
32. Correspondingly, the average number of layers processed
simultaneously for each are 5.4, 4.1, 10.2, and 8.1. As shown
in Fig. 7 Left, though DRAM access continuously decreases
as the number of cores increases from 8 to 32, the rate of
reduction is much faster when transitioning from 8 cores to 16
cores (48.0%) compared to the transition from 16 to 32 cores
(average 19.4%). Moreover, the average number of layers
processed simultaneously by the optimal 64-core architecture
(the best among all 64-core configurations under the target of
MC · E · D) is 9 layers, which does not continue to increase
with the number of cores, indicating the striking of the balance.

To fully harness the potential of “Chiplet Reuse for Multiple
Accelerators”, we have enhanced Gemini to enable DSE
for multiple computational power levels concurrently. In this
approach, Gemini strategically organizes the chiplets of each
architecture candidate with the lowest computational power
into accelerators designed for higher computational power
requirements. Subsequently, the product of MC · E · D for
all accelerators is calculated, and the architecture yielding the
minimum product is chosen as the optimal solution (Joint
Optimal in Fig. 8).

By comparing the Joint Optimal with the individual Opti-
mal, we find that although the Joint Optimal still has a certain
gap (with MC · E · D being on average 34% higher), this gap

1

Chiplet

of Best

8

of Best
128 TOPs Accelerator

Chiplets

Simba

Optimal
Joint Optimal

512 TOPs Accelerator

2.86×
2.59×
8.40×

2

Normalized Value

1.5

1

0.5

Energy
Energy
Delay
Delay
MC
MC
MC·E·D
MC·E·D

128 TOPs
512 TOPs

DRAM
Silicon Cost
Substrate
NoC
Intra-tile
DRAM

D2D

Normalized Energy

1.2

2

Monetary Cost

Normalized Delay

1.5

1.5

0.8

1

1

0.4

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

is much smaller than those of the previous two approaches.
This modest overhead is acceptable when considering that
chiplet reuse can significantly reduce NRE costs, including
one-time expenses such as design, verification, IP acquisition,
and tape-out. The benefits of this approach become increas-
ingly significant in advanced process nodes or fragmented
markets since NRE costs tend to grow non-linearly with
process advancement, while the fragmented market—with its
smaller volumes for each market—makes it challenging to
amortize expensive NRE costs effectively. Thus, it concludes
that with the proper design considerations—facilitated by the
support of Gemini—the idea of employing a single chiplet
for multiple accelerators can be effectively applied to DNN
inference accelerators.

By automatically exploring the vast optimization space we
have defined, Gemini mapping can discover solutions that are
difficult to design manually. In detail, as shown in Gemini
scheme in Fig. 9, we can see that the red and orange links have
completely disappeared. This is mainly due to two factors:
(1) the total hop count decreases by 34.2%, with a 74%
reduction in hop count on the intermediate D2D links; and
(2) Gemini can utilize the originally relatively idle links (blue)
more effectively, which is reflected in the decreased number of
blue links in the figure. As a result, the overall network traffic
is more evenly distributed, significantly improving network
performance and overall performance.
From the actual example in Fig. 9 and other similar in-
stances that are not shown, we can derive an insight: the
widely used clustered core allocation strategy [7], [15], [46],
[55], [57], [66], where a layer is assigned to consecutive
and rectangle-like core group, may not always be a good
choice. This is because the dependencies between certain
layers may have particularly high data transfer requirements,
and clustering cores for each layer together cannot disperse
this transfer demand, leading to network congestion.

C. Learn From an Actual SPM Example

In this section, we demonstrate the advantages of Gemini
mapping through a practical example (Fig. 9) and analyze how
to allocate computing resources to each layer in a multi-core
chiplet accelerator.
As can be observed in Fig.9 bottom left, the data volume
from layer1 to layer2 and from layer2 to layer3 is signifi-
cantly higher than that of other dependencies. The links with
the most data (reddest) in the Tangram SPM scheme are also
caused by these two dependencies. For instance, since the data
calculated in layer2 needs to be sent to layer3, under XY-
routing, the data calculated by the left cores of layer2 is first
sent to the right and then downwards, as illustrated in the
upper part of the mesh in Fig.9. The accumulation of ofmaps
data computed by multiple cores of layer2 leads to a large
amount of communication data on the upper on-chip links.
Thus the links are red. During the downward transmission
process, each core of layer3 consumes a portion of the ofmaps
data calculated by layer2, causing the actual data volume
to decrease gradually. This is reflected by the colour of the
downward links becoming lighter (except for the D2D links).
However, due to the smaller bandwidth of the D2D links
compared to the on-chip links, the bandwidth pressure on the
D2D links is higher.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this work, we introduce Gemini, a mapping and architec-
ture co-exploration framework for large-scale DNN chiplet
accelerators, which considers MC, performance, and energy
efficiency. For mapping, Gemini employs a novel encoding
method to define LP spatial mapping schemes and the corre-
sponding parsing method. This approach enables us to identify
the optimization space of LP SPM and unearth hidden opti-
mization opportunities. Additionally, we devise a specially-
tailored SA algorithm to efficiently navigate this space. Re-
garding architecture, we provide a highly configurable hard-
ware template and precise evaluators for performance, energy,
and MC. Our experiments demonstrate that Gemini’s explored
architecture and mapping scheme significantly outperform the
SOTA Simba architecture with Tangram mapping, with only
a slight increase in monetary cost. We also present insightful
observations about the use of chiplet technology in architecture
design and DNN workload mapping within chiplet contexts.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was partially supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (2022YFB2804103), Tsinghua University
Dushi Program, and Tsinghua University Talent Program,
National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072262).

4.4E+05

2.5E+06

1.5E+07

7.7E+07

256

3

2048

2

2048

REFERENCES

1

256

Tangram
Gemini

[66] S.
Zheng,
X.
Zhang,
L.
Liu,
S.
Wei,
and
S.
Yin,
“Atomic
dataflow
based
graph-level
workload
orchestration
for
scalable
DNN accelerators,” in IEEE International Symposium on High-
Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA 2022, Seoul, South Korea,
April 2-6, 2022.
IEEE, 2022, pp. 475–489. [Online]. Available:

[67] S. Zheng, X. Zhang, D. Ou, S. Tang, L. Liu, S. Wei, and S. Yin, “Ef-
ficient scheduling of irregular network structures on cnn accelerators,”
IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3408–3419, 2020.
[68] B. Zimmer, R. Venkatesan, Y. S. Shao, J. Clemons, M. Fojtik, N. Jiang,
B. Keller, A. Klinefelter, N. R. Pinckney, P. Raina, S. G. Tell, Y. Zhang,
W. J. Dally, J. S. Emer, C. T. Gray, S. W. Keckler, and B. Khailany, “A
0.32-128 tops, scalable multi-chip-module-based deep neural network
inference accelerator with ground-referenced signaling in 16 nm,” IEEE
J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 920–932, 2020. [Online].
Available:

APPENDIX

A. Abstract

This appendix provides guidance on accessing and using the
Gemini framework (introduced in Sec. V) to replicate the
key results shown in Fig. 5. The process is divided into two
steps: (1) Conducting DSE for a 72 TOPs setup (Table. I) to
identify the optimal architecture, referred to as G-ARCH; (2)
Comparing the efficacy of G-ARCH with G-MAP against the
baseline architecture S-ARCH and baseline mapping T-MAP,
across varying batch sizes (introduced in Sec. VI-A) and five
different networks (introduced in Sec. VI-A3). The remaining
experiments, which also involve similar DSE and analysis, are
omitted here for the sake of brevity.

B. Artifact check-list (meta-information)

• Algorithm: Simulated Annealing, Exhaustive Search and
Dynamic Programming

• Program: C++, Shell, Python (only for data collection)

• Compilation: by Makefile

• Hardware: It is best to have a server with more than 80
threads.

• Metrics: Cost function (MCα × Eβ × Dγ, MC × E × D is
employed in DSE. E × D is employed in the comparisons
with baseline.)

• Experiments: reproduce Fig. 5, including 72TOPs DSE and
comparisons with baseline.

• How much disk space required (approximately)?: 1GB

• How
much
time
is
needed
to
prepare
work-
flow(approximately)?: Several minutes at most.

• How much time is needed to complete experiments (ap-
proximately)?: For DSE, it takes about 38 minutes with 80
threads; For comparison, it takes about 14 minutes using
10 threads. The server is Intel Xeon Platinum 8260 server

• Publicly available?: Yes

• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: BSD 3-Clause License

• Archived (provide DOI)?: 10.5281/zenodo.10207613

C. Description

D. Installation

Then you can run the following command to reproduce the
Excel data of Fig. 5. The Fig 5.csv file, generated in the
current directory, can be validated through comparison with
the Fig 5.csv file, which contains the data used in Fig. 5,
located in the expected results folder.

For artifact evaluation, start by downloading the artifact
from Zenodo:

$ wget -O GEMINI_AE.zip
/10207613/files/GEMINI_AE.zip?download=1
$ unzip GEMINI_AE.zip

$ python3 Fig5_reproduce.py <output_dir>/compare.
csv

Our Gemini exploration framework is in “GEMINI”. We
use Makefile to build the GEMINI framework.

Please note that “<output dir>” refers to the address where
the “compare.csv” file is stored, which is the folder named
with a timestamp within the ‘Compare log‘ directory like
./compare log/2023 11 08 10 56 52/compare.csv.

$ cd GEMINI
$ make

Then
the
executable
target
will
be
generated
at
“./build/stschedule”.
You can install the needed python packages using pip with
following commands.

F. Evaluation and expected results

There are two key data results: the optimal architecture
discovered by DSE (2, 36, 144GB/s, 32GB/s, 16GB/s, 2MB,
1024) and the improvement ratio of G-ARCH+G-MAP com-
pared to S-ARCH+T-MAP (1.98× performance improvement,
1.41× energy efficiency improvement, and 14.3% MC in-
crease). The optimal architecture and improvement ratio will
be displayed in the windows after executing dse.sh and
compare.sh scripts respectively, and can be verified against
the mentioned results. Moreover, the breakdown of energy
consumption and delay data for Fig. 5 can be verified by com-
paring the “Fig 5.csv” file generated in GEMINI folder with
the “Fig 5.csv” located in the “expected results” directory.

$ pip install -r requirements.txt

Or you can use conda to install with following commands.

$ conda install --file requirements.txt

E. Experiment workflow

1) 72TOPs DSE: Once GEMINI framework is built, you
can execute DSE experiment and search the best arch with
command below.

$ ./dse.sh

G. Methodology

The DSE script uses 80 threads and takes around 38 minutes to
run on Intel Xeon Platinum 8260 server. Then you can see the
state of current running DSE. Once the process is completed,
the command-line window will output the optimal architecture.
You can compare this optimal architecture with the one
mentioned in Sec. VI-B, which is (2, 36, 144GB/s, 32GB/s,
16GB/s, 2MB, 1024). In the ”dse log” folder, there will be a
folder named with the timestamp, containing the outputs for
each architecture candidate, as well as the summarized “re-
sult.csv” file. You can compare the generated ”result.csv” with
the “DSE result.csv” provided in ”expected results” folder,
which is employed in our paper.
2) Comparison with Baselines: Once you obtain the op-
timal architecture, you can proceed with the comparison of
G-ARCH+G-MAP, S-ARCH+T-MAP, and S-ARCH+G-MAP
for the five networks and two batch sizes to reproduce Fig. 5
with following commands.

Submission, reviewing and badging methodology:

•
review-badging

•

•

$ ./compare.sh <output_dir>/best_arch.txt