A Heterogeneous Chiplet Architecture for Accelerating End-to-End Transformer
Models

Harsh Sharma*

Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA,

Pratyush Dhingra

Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA,

Janardhan Rao Doppa

Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA,

Umit Y. Ogras

University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, WI, USA,

Partha Pratim Pande

Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA,

Transformers have revolutionized deep learning and generative modeling, enabling advancements in natural language processing tasks.

However, the size of transformer models is increasing continuously, driven by enhanced capabilities across various deep learning tasks.

This trend of ever-increasing model size has given rise to new challenges in terms of memory and compute requirements. Conventional

computing platforms, including GPUs, suffer from suboptimal performance due to the memory demands imposed by models with

millions/billions of parameters. The emerging chiplet-based platforms provide a new avenue for compute- and data-intensive machine

learning (ML) applications enabled by a Network-on-Interposer (NoI). However, designing suitable hardware accelerators for executing

Transformer inference workloads is challenging due to a wide variety of complex computing kernels in the Transformer architecture. In

this paper, we leverage chiplet-based heterogeneous integration (HI) to design a high-performance and energy-efficient multi-chiplet

platform to accelerate transformer workloads. We demonstrate that the proposed NoI architecture caters to the data access patterns inherent

in a transformer model. The optimized placement of the chiplets and the associated NoI links and routers enable superior performance

compared to the state-of-the-art hardware accelerators. The proposed NoI-based architecture demonstrates scalability across varying

transformer models and improves latency and energy efficiency by up to 11.8× and 2.36×, respectively when compared with the existing

state-of-the-art architecture HAIMA.

CCS CONCEPTS • 2.5D • NLP • Processing-in-memory • Network-on-interposer • Transformer • Chiplet-based architecture

* This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant CSR-2308530, and in part by the Army Research Office under Grant
ARO-W911NF-24-1-0240. Authors’ addresses: H. Sharma, P. Dhingra, J. R. Doppa, and P. P. Pande, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA; emails: Umit Y. Ogras, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Madison, WI, 53706, USA; email:

ACM Reference Format:

First Author’s Name, Initials, and Last Name, Second Author’s Name, Initials, and Last Name, and Third Author’s Name, Initials, and

Last Name. 2018. The Title of the Paper: ACM Conference Proceedings Manuscript Submission Template: This is the subtitle of the

paper, this document both explains and embodies the submission format for authors using Word. In Woodstock ’18: ACM Symposium

on Neural Gaze Detection, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. NOTE: This block will be

automatically generated when manuscripts are processed after acceptance.

1 INTRODUCTION

We are at the cusp of a revolution from deep generative AI models, also referred to as foundation models (FMs), for
text (e.g., ChatGPT) and images (e.g., stable diffusion) with hundreds of billions of parameters trained on a massive amount
of unlabeled data. In the future, fine-tuning FMs on domain-specific private data (e.g., BloombergGPT for finance,
AutoGPT for general-purpose automation) to solve a specific task with high accuracy will emerge as a fundamental
challenge. The current FMs employ Transformer architectures due to their widespread success in applications, including
natural language processing, computer vision, and multi-modal integration [1] [2]. The number of parameters and
complexity of transformer models are growing at a rapid pace to meet the application demands, including scale of data and
high accuracy. Hence, designing suitable hardware accelerators for Transformer models involves significant computation
and storage challenges, particularly when addressing longer contextual information. The main challenge arises from the
quadratic relationship between the compute requirements and the input sequence length (N). Unlike recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), Transformers employ self-attention to process various modalities of data, including text, images, videos,
and speech, enabling tokens within sequences to relate to one another effectively. This approach overcomes the vanishing
gradient problem in RNNs and allows to effectively leverage long-range sequential dependencies.

Widespread adoption of Transformer models in real-world applications implies a vast demand for designing hardware
platforms with adequate computational and storage resources [1] [2] [3]. We must tackle complex data movement, memory
hierarchy, and latency challenges while designing suitable hardware architectures. Hence, there is a need for designing
large-scale chips with high memory and compute capabilities. Moreover, due to various types of computational kernels
involved in Transformer models, we require different types of processing elements, such as Tensor cores, GPUs, DRAMs,
and processing-in-memory (PIM)-based accelerators on the same system. Such large-scale and heterogeneous integration
increases the area of monolithic chips significantly [4]. One of the major challenges in the silicon industry is the exploding
fabrication cost as the size of monolithic chips approaches the reticle limit [4].

Chiplet-based 2.5D systems that integrate multiple smaller chips (chiplets) on a single interposer offer a promising
solution for reducing the manufacturing cost of large monolithic chips and enabling large-scale heterogeneous integration
in a single system. Chiplets are connected through the network-on-interposer (NoI). In a heterogeneous chiplet-based
system, designing a scalable NoI architecture is daunting due to the relatively large physical distances between chiplets,
poor technology scaling of electrical wires, and varying data movement patterns depending on the heterogeneity in
constituent chiplets. This data movement introduces performance overhead. In addition, managing data movement across
different levels of the memory hierarchy is non-trivial, requiring careful placement of chiplets, NoI links, and routers to
ensure efficient data access paths. However, current state-of-the-art Transformer accelerators do not consider the
challenges associated with the heterogeneous integration (HI) within a single system. We adopt a holistic view by
considering the interactions among various computing kernels within transformers to design the HI architecture. We also
optimize the system-level performance by choosing a suitable chiplet configuration for each computational kernel. In this
paper, we present an NoI backbone design methodology, enabling a heterogeneous chiplet architecture for end-to-end
acceleration of Transformer models, and demonstrate significant improvements over existing hardware accelerators.

The major contributions of this paper are as follows:

1.
We propose a novel methodology for designing a high-performance and energy-efficient NoI architecture
supporting heterogeneous chiplets for accelerating Transformer models.
2.
We demonstrate that the proposed NoI architecture caters to the data access patterns inherent in a heterogeneous
system. The optimized placement of the chiplets and the associated NoI links and routers enable superior
performance compared to the state-of-the-art counterparts.
3.
Extensive performance evaluation shows up to 11.8× and 2.36× reduction in latency and energy compared to state-
of-the-art architectures.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the relevant prior work. Section III introduces the
overall architecture and explains the associated data flow. Section IV presents the experimental setup and detailed
performance evaluation. Finally, Section V concludes the paper by highlighting the salient contributions of this work.

2 RELATED WORK

As this work is focused on designing 2.5D accelerators for Transformers, we review the related work in two parts:
2.5D-based manycore architectures and Transformer accelerators.

2.5D-based manycore architectures: Both application-specific and general-purpose chiplet architectures have been
explored. Design space exploration of 2.5D-based systems considering technology nodes, chiplet-sizes, reducing DRAM
costs, manufacturing defects, big-little chiplet paradigm, and multi-link network frequency architectures have been
proposed [5] [6] [7] [8] [9]. The NoI paradigm becomes crucial as the communication demand increases with many chiplets
integrated on the same substrate [5]. So far, multiple NoI architectures have been proposed in the literature. Most of these
architectures are based on conventional multi-hop interconnection architectures, such as mesh or torus [6]. A server-scale
application-specific 2.5D architecture called SWAP is proposed for deep learning workloads [10]. SIMBA introduces tiling
optimizations on fixed NoI topologies for executing deep models such as ResNet50 [11]. NN-Baton proposes a framework
to explore the chiplet design space for convolutional operations [12]. Recent work discusses the advantages of integrating
heterogeneous chiplets on the interposer to reduce recurring design costs [13]. A scalable high-performance chiplet-based
architecture called HexaMesh has been proposed recently [14]. However, none of the above 2.5D architecture can be
employed off-the-shelf to accelerate Transformer models as they do not efficiently handle the data-access patterns
involving heterogeneous chiplets and computational kernels.

Transformer accelerators: PIM is an enabling technology to accelerate deep learning workloads [10]. Several PIM
architectures have been proposed for Transformer models. ReTransformer is a ReRAM-based PIM accelerator designed
only for the attention kernel and is oblivious to the data access patterns involved in a Transformer model [1]. Additionally,
the expected rewrites due to intermediate results during the attention computation within the Transformer model would
exceed the write endurance of the ReRAM blocks. We have quantified this limitation in the section 4.4. Xformer is another
accelerator that uses ReRAM-SRAM arrays to divide the attention kernel into dynamic and static components, respectively
[15]. Xformer maps more frequently updated computation kernels to SRAM arrays. HAIMA is a recently proposed hybrid
DRAM-SRAM compute-in-memory architecture [3]. HAIMA accelerates parallel kernels using SRAM and DRAM
components. Multiple ASIC designs have been proposed to accelerate the attention kernel only [16] [17] [18]. These
ASICS do not accelerate the entire Transformer model. EdgeBERT leverages dynamic voltage-frequency scaling based on
the early exit prediction of ALBERT, which is a lightweight Transformer model with reduced memory footprint [19]. A
recently proposed monolithic-3D accelerator, called AccelTran prunes activations at runtime [20]. TransCODE is another
codesign framework that finds a Transformer-accelerator pair that maximizes the performance objectives within the given

user-defined constraints [21]. Newton, FIMDRAM, and McDRAM cascade bit-arithmetic units to do computation near
DRAM banks [18] [22]. However, the complicated bit-parallel and bulky buffers incur significant overhead and decrease
memory density. Other methodologies, such as TurboTransformer, introduce large area overhead and have limited
acceleration due to simpler tiled computation [23]. TransPIM implements the computing kernels in HBM memory stacks
with optimized data paths using token sharing in a ring broadcast among memory banks during attention computation.
TransPIM uses auxiliary compute units to avoid extra data movement and suffers from latency overhead at each kernel,
compromising the overall execution time [2]. Multiple industrial-grade system design explored design techniques to
increase compute and on-chip memory within a reticle limit due to the leakage power constraint. A rack-based scaling is
employed for large-scale transformer acceleration by Nvidia, AMD, and Intel with DGX A100, EPYC, and Gaudi line of
AI processors respectively [24] [25]. Samsung recently proposed Aquabolt-XL, a processing-in-memory (PIM) based 3D-
architecture to enable near DRAM memory computing using HBM2 stacking [26]. While Aquabolt-XL houses comparable
DRAM memory to a GPU counterpart, it yields limited performance benefits as the logic is much slower and affects the
row access latency by up to 2× compared to the standard GPU counterpart [27]. This leads to suboptimal performance
exacerbated due to frequent rewrites between the PIM chiplets and the DRAM banks. Disintegrating memory and compute
through chiplet-based systems frees up area on the interposer to enable considerable performance benefits. It also enables
heterogeneous integration (in terms of technology node, process variation, hierarchical routers).

To summarize, previous work primarily focuses on accelerating the attention kernel only. Moreover, none of the prior
work considers the role of heterogeneous chiplets along with the associated dataflow to accelerate end-to-end Transformer
models. In this paper, we fill this critically important gap in the state-of-art by proposing design principles of a
heterogeneous chiplet-based 2.5D manycore architecture to accelerate end-to-end Transformer models.

3 TRANSFORMER COMPUTATION KERNELS

This section presents the distinct features of a Transformer model and explains the computational and communication
characteristics during the inference process.

3.1
Computational Kernels within Transformers

A Transformer primarily comprises an encoder and a decoder stack with a similar structure. The computational structure
is identical in Transformer models with varying numbers of encoders/decoder blocks. Fig. 1 show the encoder-decoder
structure with their internal computational blocks: it takes an input sequence of length N (e.g., natural text), then it produces
an output sequence (e.g., natural text). The encoder has a stack of k identical blocks. Each block consists of two major
functional modules: multi-head self-attention and feed-forward (FF). Following these two functional modules, there is a
residual block to add the input and the output and to perform the layer norm operation. The multi-head attention layer
receives data from the input embedding or previous encoder block. The decoder stack also consists of k identical blocks
with an extra cross-attention layer to connect with the output from the last encoder stack.

A Transformer initiates the computation by loading the word embedding "!"# and positional encodings #!$%.
Tokenization is the matrix-vector multiplication (MVM) process, where an embedding layer first processes inputs (e.g.,
words in a sentence) to obtain a learned vector representation of each word in the input sequence. This is a one-time process
for an entire Transformer model (encoder-decoder stack).

" = "!"# + #!$%("!"#) (1)

After the tokenizing step (a linear MVM operation), each token is represented by a vector of length dmodel, where dmodel
depends on the hidden dimension of the Transformer (e.g., dmodel = 128 for BERT-Tiny and dmodel = 768 for BERT-Base)

Fig. 1: Overview of the Transformer model; (a) Encoder structure and inherent computational kernels; (b) overall dataflow structure (c)
Decoder structure with their inherent computational kernels.

[21]. The corresponding MVM operation is weight stationary and can be effectively computed using processing-in-memory
(PIM)-based compute units such as ReRAM chiplets. Next, the weight matrices for the multi-head attention operations are
loaded from the memory to the compute units (the structure of each compute unit corresponding to the kernel is explained
later). Consistent with the prior work, for h multi heads (each represented with a 16-bit floating point), h separate weight
matrices must be loaded to compute *&, ,&, -& shown in (3):

*!"#$%+*!"#$%
,
(2)

) ∈ℝ

', 2&

(, and 2&

./01 2&

', "2&

(, "2&

) ∀ : ∈; (3)

*&, ,&, -& = "2&

Within each self-attention head, the generated tokens are multiplied by distinct weight matrices (distinct for h heads)

to obtain the Query *, Key ,, and Value - matrices (3). For each sequence, the attention generates a representation of the
sequence encoded with weighted information from all (or a subset in Masked-Attention) other tokens. This computation
depends on the size of the 2', 2(, and 2) matrices. For every self-attention layer within a Transformer encoder, all the

compute units must be rewritten before the MVM operation is performed since the inputs change dynamically for each

token and must be stored in internal registers or on-chip buffers. Traditionally, crossbar-based PIM platforms are employed
for the MVM operations involved in DNN workloads [10]. In this case, however, such intermediate matrices will require
substantial storage capacity or frequent updates. Hence, traditional nonvolatile memory (NVM)-based PIM architectures
are unsuitable here due to their limited write endurance [28]. For example, for BERT-Base and Bert-Tiny, intermediate

matrices take up to 8.98× and 2.06× of original weight matrix storage, respectively. The total memory requirements for the
two models are 52.8MB and 3.4GB, respectively, when only the weights and positional embeddings are stored [21]. This
storage will grow even more for bigger models, which cannot be stored by using more resources and by remaining within
the reticle limit of the 2.5D system with an acceptable yield. Hence, the only possibility is to update these intermediate
matrices continuously. Consequently, the memory rewrite easily crosses the acceptable endurance limit of the PIM devices
[28]. Hence, to implement the attention computation, instead of PIM chiplets, we use the streaming multiprocessors (SMs)
along with the associated memory controllers (MCs) to access the weights 2 from the DRAM chiplet. All the ,, *, -
computations are executed parallelly, leading to a many-to-few traffic scenario (multiple SMs and a few MCs).

Fig. 2: Overview of the (a) proposed heterogeneous architecture dataflow. ❶-❺ describe the dataflow within each computation kernel
corresponding to Fig. 1; (b) 2.5D heterogeneous integration for accelerating Transformer model. It should be noted that the figure is an
illustration and not drawn to scale.

Next, the outputs, Query, and Key matrices are multiplied and normalized with a hidden dimension dmodel by a Softmax
layer to generate the intermediate attention probabilities (4) & (5).

=& = *&,& (4)

= DAEFGHI J
=&
KL"-*!.

M (5)

The intermediate attention probabilities are then multiplied with the Value matrix to obtain the final output (6).

#& = (6)

Multiple attention heads are processed in parallel, and the resultant matrices are concatenated and multiplied with the
weight matrix 2&

/, which maps the attention probabilities to output scores before advancing the output to the FF layers

where N is the input-sequence length (given by (7)).

"012 =

/R ∀ : ∈; (7)

Once the score is computed within the multi-head self-attention block, we add the input to the output of the multi-head
attention and normalize the resultant matrix. This step is the layer-norm operation employed to reduce covariance shifts
within the fully connected (FC) layer [21]. GeLU is the commonly used activation function in Transformers [2] [29] [30].
For modern large language models (LLMs), FC layers dominate the runtime of the decoder block since the model
dimension dmodel is much larger than the input sequence length N and the context length T%-$3!43, thus U(;L"-*!.

5) >>
U(T%-$3!43

5
L"-*!.). For example, more than 99% of MVM operations in GPT-3 are spent on executing the FC layers. Since
the FC layers are not frequently updated, they are static and have significant weight overlap in each encoder-decoder stack.
Therefore, we utilize ReRAM chiplets for the FF [15].

To summarize, we use a combination of SM-MC-DRAM and ReRAM chiplets placed on a 2.5D interposer to execute
the end-to-end Transformer models. Due to this heterogeneity, analyzing the inter-chiplet traffic patterns is imperative to
design the overall NoI architecture.

3.2 Communication between Computation Kernels

Fig. 2(a) shows the overall dataflow in the heterogeneous chiplet platform. Various components of the NoI traffic are:

Input Embedding: The input embedding provides each token with an input representation. The tokenization is a series
of MVM on the input sequence where the overall computation is sequentially distributed among multiple ReRAM chiplets.
Data always flows from the :3, to the (: + 1)3, chiplet. Hence, contiguity should be maintained on the physical NoI layer,
to the extent possible, between any two consecutive chiplets to reduce the communication overhead. Since existing NoI
architectures are primarily based on standard multi-hop regular topologies such as a mesh or a torus, it may not always be
possible to find contiguously placed chiplets available to map successive parts of the input embedding. If two consecutive
layers are mapped far apart, it will lead to long-range multi-hop communication through the NoI. This, in turn, will degrade
the performance and energy efficiency of the NoI and hence the overall system. Therefore, we connect the ReRAM chiplets
using space-filling curves (SFCs). This dataflow-awareness within computational kernels has been previously exploited
for designing a NoI called Floret for large-scale CNN inferencing using SFC [9] [31]. SFCs are a specialized class of
algorithmic mapping techniques that have found significant application in locality-preserving data structure for numerous
scientific applications that involve spatial and range queries [32] [33]. More specifically, an SFC maps a multi-dimensional
point cloud onto a single dimension; therefore, each SFC represents a linear ordering of the input set of points. Numerous
types of SFCs have been defined over the decades, including simple schemes such as row/column major curves to more
sophisticated curves such as the Hilbert curve, Morton or Z-curve, or onion curve. For a review of classical SFCs, please
refer to [33] [34] [35].

This operation is referenced as ❶ in the Fig. 2(a). Our approach connects the ReRAM chiplets (in the order of data
flow) along the contiguous path formed by the SFC. The SFC stitches multiple chiplets contiguously and has a head and a
tail that connect the chiplets linearly (Fig. 2 (a)).

K Q V Computation: We implement this step, which is the starting part of the self-attention mechanism using SM, MC,
and DRAM chiplets. After computing each input token generated in Step 1, 26, 2',, 2) need to be loaded. We use the

FlashAttention dataflow to partition the matrices onto the SMs [36]. This operation can be effectively performed using
DRAM (HBM2) with multiple SM chiplets for each MC partition. The data transmission happens in two steps. First, for
each head h, 26, 2',, 2) are loaded in the SMs through the MCs. Then, the corresponding ,, *, - is computed for each

input token. This gives rise to SM to MC data exchange. Due to many SMs and a limited number of MCs, this results in a
many-to-few data flow. These steps are shown as ❷ & ❸ in Fig. 2(a). The placement of the DRAM chiplet also
contributes to the overall latency and hence the placement is imperative with respect to other computing chiplets. We
consider SM, MC, and DRAM chiplets are all distributed over the 2.5D interposer. We call it 2.5D heterogeneous
integration (2.5D-HI), shown in Fig. 2(b).

Score Computation: This is the final step of the self-attention to multiply the attention score matrix S after Softmax by
the V matrix before the FF layer (shown as ❹ in Fig. 2(a)). The placement of SM and MC chiplets is critical for the latency
and energy consumption.

Feed Forward Layer: The FF network consists of two consecutive FC layers, which are large static hidden layers. Like
DNN models, the fully connected layers have fixed sizes and sparse weight updates compared to encoder outputs. The FC
layers have dataflow from layer \& to layer \&89 connection. The activations and corresponding weights of the adjacent
layers must be mapped in a contiguous manner. Hence, there is a need to maintain contiguity on the physical NoI layer, to
the extent possible, between the neural layers to reduce communication overhead. This is identical to the dataflow pattern
observed in the case of Input Embedding generation. Hence, like ❶, an SFC is employed to maintain contiguity among
communicating layers mapped on the ReRAM chiplets. The ReRAM macro refers to a set of ReRAM chiplets employed
to execute computations in the feed-forward layers contiguously, thereby reducing communication overhead within a
Network on Interconnect (NoI). This part of the execution is shown as ❺ in Fig. 2(a). We repeat the above-described

dataflow loop starting from ❷ for the next encoder as Input Embedding is a one-time process in the overall execution
flow. It should be noted that the same ReRAM macro is used for ❶ and ❺ as they execute on different time stamps. This
macro of ReRAM chiplets maintains data flow between consecutive layers efficiently, leveraging SFCs to preserve locality
and enhance the performance and energy efficiency of the overall system. Hence, we consider all the ReRAM chiplets
together as a ReRAM macro. In the NoI design, we optimize the location of the ReRAM macro with respect to SM, MC,
and DRAM chiplets.

The original transformer model with encoder-decoder blocks is designed for translation-class of natural-language
processing (NLP) tasks [37]. However, the transformer architectures evolve continuously with structural variations tailored
to other NLP tasks. Several transformer architectures have recently been proposed, including transformers composed of
decoder-only (GPT-class of transformer models) or encoder-only (BERT-class of transformer models) blocks. This
effectively divides the model complexity in half, reducing the computational requirements.

Additionally, numerous architectural refinements have also emerged within the encoder/decoder block. One such
advancement is the introduction of Multi-Query Attention (MQA). MQA is specifically designed to enhance the efficiency
of attention mechanisms [38] [30]. MQA, unlike the standard multi-head attention (MHA), utilizes the same K and V
values across heads while assigning distinct Q vectors to each head. Fig. 3 shows the difference between MHA and MQA.
MQA shares a single key and value head across all query heads. The amount of computation performed by MQA is
equivalent to the standard MHA. However, the key difference is the reduced amount of data exchange from memory to
computing chiplets.

Another variation is the parallel attention framework, which executes the model with both the attention and FF layers
operating concurrently [30]. The model modifies the computational kernel in each transformer block and employs a parallel
formulation as opposed to the conventional “serialized” formulation. The standard formulation, in this context, can be
expressed as:

^ = I + _\# `\HaCB;ABG bI + cFFCPF:APQ\HaCB;ABG(I)Rde (8)

In contrast, the parallel formulation can be described as:

^ = I + _\#Q\HaCB;ABG(I)R + cFFCPF:APQ\HaCB;ABG(I)R (9)

Fig. 3: High-level illustration of the difference between multi-head attention (MHA) and multi-query attention (MQA).

The parallel formulation (given in (9)) facilitates a pipelined execution of attention and feed-forward computations, thereby
achieving higher speedup. We consider all these variations (encoder/decoder-only, MQA, and parallel attention) and
propose a model-agnostic NOI tailored for different classes of transformer models.

3.3 NoI Design Optimization

Considering the traffic patterns mentioned above, we need to place the DRAM, the ReRAM Macro, SM, and MC
chiplets on the interposer to maximize throughput and minimize the data exchange latency to accelerate the Transformer
model inferencing. Suppose each candidate design (h) in the NoI design space corresponds to a specific placement of the
chiplets along with the routers and inter-router links. Our goal is to achieve high throughput under the given application
traffic pattern. Minimizing the mean i(h) and standard deviation j(h) of the traffic distribution leads to an overall higher
throughput of the candidate NoI designs [10] [39].

MOO Formulation: The design of heterogeneous NoI architecture can be formulated as a multi-objective optimization
(MOO) problem. We can represent the MOO formulations as follows:

h∗= = i(h), j(h)R (10)

where h∗ is the set of Pareto optimal designs. Here, we aim to find the optimal placement of chiplets and associated routers
and links such that the design requirements for all the elements are satisfied. Each candidate NoI design must be evaluated
efficiently to help guide our search for the best NoI architecture. Below, we describe the critical elements of our MOO
formulation.

1)
Design Variables: There are two types of design variables for NoI-based chiplet design h = (h%, h.), where h%
corresponds to a candidate placement of chiplets and h. corresponds to a candidate placement of communication
links between chiplets.
2)
Constraints: We have two constraints to define a feasible solution space. First, the NoI should enable data transfer
between any two pair of chiplets, i.e., it should connect all chiplets with no islands. Second, the number of links
used to design NoI should not exceed that in a 2-D mesh. However, with an efficient NoI, we can reduce the
number of links compared to a mesh NoI [10].
Objectives: Our objective is to maximize the system throughput. Specifically, we consider optimizing two
objectives, namely, the mean i(h) and standard deviation j(h) of the traffic utilization o6 on each communication
link k at time t, determined by the NoI frequency. Note that the p&;, the amount of traffic between chiplets : and l,

respectively, can be obtained by profiling the application workload, i.e., inference of Transformer models.

These parameters are defined as follows:

<

<

o6 = qq p&;(F) ∙s&;6

(11)

&=9

;=9

>

i(h, F) = 1

# × q o6

(12)

6=9

5
>

j(h, F) = t1

# qQo6 −i(h, F)R

(13)

6=9

where \ represents the number of routers and # represents the number of links in the system, as mentioned earlier, s&; is
a Boolean representation if link v is being used between router : and router l.

s&;6 = w1,
if chiplet i, j communicate across link k.
0, otherwise

To compute the average throughput across all timestamps, we take a time average of the mean i(h) and standard deviation
jQ!R as represented in (14) and (15):

i(h) = Hmà i(h, F) (14)

j(h) = Hmà j(h, F) (15)

Once we solve the MOO problem to obtain the Pareto optimal NoI designs with proper placement of chiplets and inter-
chiplet links (h∗) among all possible system configurations, we perform cycle-accurate simulations for each design in h∗ to
find the design with the lowest EDP and lower latency than a mesh NoI simultaneously.

MOO Solver: The critical challenge in solving the MOO problem for our chiplet-based design is the vast
combinatorial design space. We need to consider designs with fewer than or equal to the number of links in a 2D mesh

NoI for energy efficiency through smaller routers. Existing MOO methods consider a significantly smaller size of the
design space and are slow in converging to Pareto optimal design set. Simulated annealing-based AMOSA algorithm has
been applied for the problem of heterogeneous NoC design in the past [40]. AMOSA is shown to be superior to genetic
algorithm (GA), or branch and bound algorithms [41] [42]. However, since AMOSA is based on simulated annealing, it
needs to be annealed slowly to ensure a good solution, which does not scale well with our expected search space [39]. Prior
work has shown that we can significantly improve the accuracy and speed of design optimization by utilizing knowledge
gained from the past explored designs. The key idea is to extract relevant knowledge from previously explored designs to
intelligently guide the search to more promising parts of the design space. In this work, we adopt the MOO-STAGE, a
MOO algorithm that belongs to this class of data-driven methods, for the problem of NoI design, noting that any other
MOO solver can be used. MOO-STAGE is an iterative algorithm which learns an evaluation function to select good starting
states to guide local search procedures such as greedy search toward better local optima [10] [39]. Each iteration consists
of the following three steps: First, we use the current evaluation function to select a good starting state for the local search
procedure. Second, we perform a local search from this selected starting state until we reach a local optimum and compute
the quality of the corresponding Pareto set in terms of Pareto-hyper volume (PHV) as a metric. Third, we update the
evaluation function based on the training data from the local search runs. As the evaluation function improves with the
training data over iterations, it prunes the design space and directs the search toward promising regions [39].

Learning Evaluation Function: The goal of the evaluation function is to estimate the quality of the Pareto set
obtained by performing a local search from a given starting design. Given a learned evaluation function, we perform a
local search guided by this evaluation function until we reach a local optimum to select the starting state (Meta search) for
the actual local search process (Base search). If the evaluation function is accurate, it will avoid bad starting states and

select promising starting designs to improve the efficiency and accuracy of design optimization. Otherwise, we update the
evaluation function to minimize errors. Each training instance in MOO-STAGE corresponds to the past local search run:
sequence of designs (L9, L5, . . . . , L?) forming the local search trajectory and the quality of the resulting Pareto set from
the local optima measured in terms of PHV metric. We create one regression training example for each design L& on the

local search trajectory: L& is the input and PHV of the local optima is the output. We give the aggregate set of regression
examples to the random forest algorithm to create/update the evaluation function. We use random forest as it was shown

Fig. 4: Pareto optimal points when evaluating different architectural design choices. Both the x- and y- axis are normalized with respect
to a standard 2D-Mesh connections. A lower mean and standard deviation is preferred for higher performance and energy efficiency of
the interconnection network.

to be a fast and accurate learner to create effective evaluation functions [10]. Fig. 4 shows the pareto optimal curve for
different design variables considered in this work for accelerating transformer models.

4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section, we first introduce the experimental setup to evaluate the performance of the proposed HI architecture.
Next, we describe the transformer model considered in our evaluation. Subsequently, we present a comparative
performance evaluation of the proposed 2.5D-HI architecture with respect to state-of-the-art baselines.

4.1 Experimental Setup:

4.1.1 System Specification and Evaluation Setup:

Our performance evaluation considers three system sizes of 36, 64, and 100 chiplets. Fig. 5 shows the design
specification of each computational platform employed in the 2.5D chiplet-based systems. The chiplet system employs
SM, MC, DRAM and ReRAM chiplets. We maintain SM-MC configurations consistent with the Volta architecture [27]
[43]. Each MC is connected to a DRAM chiplet. To illustrate, in the case of a 100 chiplet system, we divide the 2.5D-HI
system into 64 SMs, 8 MCs along with 8 DRAM chiplets corresponding to 8 partitions of the HBM2 memory, and 20
ReRAM chiplets connected as a ReRAM macro. Note that this is an example system size, and the proposed design
methodology and evaluation scheme are valid for other system configurations.

The ReRAM chiplets perform the Feedforward (FF) network computation where the weights are spatially partitioned
across the ReRAM chiplets. Our approach connects the ReRAM chiplets (in the order of data flow) along the contiguous
path formed by the SFC. Subsequently, a pipelined implementation is utilized across the FF network layers where the

Fig. 5: Illustration of 2.5D-HI integration for accelerating Transformer model.

output from MHA computation serves as input to the pipeline. The number of ReRAM crossbars (chiplets) necessary to
map the FF weights vary based on the transformer model size. Thus, we utilize a strategy of weight duplication in scenarios
where the model's weight parameters can be mapped on a subset of the available ReRAM chiplets. The duplication of
weights is a common strategy to enhance computation throughput on ReRAM-based architectures [44]. It creates copies
of the layer weights and parallelizes the computation across multiple ReRAM crossbars [44]. This helps prevent any
underutilization of ReRAM chiplets during FF computation with varying model sizes. Table 2 presents the allocation for
the three-system sizes considered in this work.

SMs are based on the NVIDIA Volta architecture with 10 Tensor cores along with the scratchpad memory for arithmetic
operations. The group of collocated SMs (SM cluster in Fig. 2 (a)) are associated with a particular MC. Following prior
work, we consider each ReRAM chiplet to consist of 16 ReRAM tiles and peripheral circuits such as accumulator, buffer,
activation, and pooling units [10]. Each tile consists of multiple processing elements (PEs) comprising 128×128 ReRAM
crossbar arrays. Within each tile 96 PEs are connected with an H-Tree-based point-to-point network [10] [45].

DRAM Microarchitecture: The DRAM used in the proposed chiplet-based architecture is an industry standard High
Bandwidth Memory (HBM2), which is a multi-layered DRAM technology specifically designed to offer high bandwidth
for data-intensive applications such as the transformer acceleration considered in this paper. We do not integrate any
custom computing hardware within HBM in our proposed architecture. The HBM2 uses Through-Silicon Vias (TSVs) to
connect multiple 3-D stacked DRAM tiers on top of a base logic die. Each stack has two independent HBM channels where
the operation of channels, including those within the same core die, is independent via private data and address/control
signals and buses. Each channel utilizes dedicated 128-bit non-shared TSV connections for data exchange. Overall, the
memory bandwidth provided by the HBM is determined by the number of DRAM stacks, with each stack providing a 256-
bit wide interface via two channels. Further, each channel has an associated HBM memory controller (HBM-MC1, HBM-

Table 2: Resource allocation among SM, MC, and ReRAM chiplets for different system sizes

System Size
(No. of Chiplets)

SM

MC

DRAM

ReRAM

36
20
4
4
8
64
36
6
6
16
100
64
8
8
20

Fig. 6: Illustration of communication protocol between the DRAM chiplets and the (memory controller) MC chiplets.

MC2, and so on), as shown in Fig. 5 in the logic die. The function of the HBM-MC is to enable data exchange with the
MC chiplet. The communication protocol between the HBM-MC and the HBM channels is facilitated through a First-In-
First-Out (FIFO) based interface within the scheduler block, as shown in Fig. 6. This interface is partitioned into distinct
FIFOs, allocated for logical address, write, and read data.

The HBM-MC performs address mapping and reads/writes data when a read/write request is issued. We connect each
HBM-MC to the scheduler within the MC chiplet in a point-to-point manner, as shown in Fig. 6. Each MC chiplet is
equipped with a dedicated physical layer IP interface (PHY) responsible for providing a low-level physical interface to the
associated HBM channel through the HBM-MC. The PHY utilizes an industry standard interface protocol (DFI) between
the HBM-MC and the MC chiplet [46]. The role of the PHY encompasses the generation of all handshake signals with
precise timing requirements necessary for interfacing.

Depending on the system size, we utilize three distinct HBM2 configurations in this work. Specifically, we employ: 2-
tier, 3-tier, and 4-tier DRAM stacks, correspondingly tailored to accommodate the memory demands of systems comprising
of 36, 64, and 100 chiplets, respectively. It should be noted that HBM2 can support up to 8 DRAM stacks.

Here, MC and DRAM chiplets are allocated in a 1:1 ratio. Each DRAM chiplet corresponds to an HBM channel. This
uniform allocation is necessary since the interface communication protocol between HBM-MC and MC chiplet requires
point-to-point communication to facilitate data transfer to and from the HBM.

The utilization of SM, MC, and ReRAM chiplets is independent of the transformer model parameters. Specifically, SM
chiplets execute each computation in multiple parallel threads with instruction and data accessed through the MC. The
number of threads for each MHA computation is orders of magnitude higher than the available SMs. Consequently, this
prevents any underutilization scenario for SM-MC chiplets based on the model size for the MHA computation.

Evaluation Tool Flow: The weights for each computational kernel are loaded through the DRAM chiplets, stacked on
top of the interposer shown in Fig. 5. We obtain the workload traces using Nvidia-smi with Nvidia A40 GPU to evaluate
the performance and energy efficiency of the system. The software stack for running the Transformer model to obtain the
traffic pattern is built on top of the CuDNN 12.2 with PyTorch, consistent with prior work [20]. We develop a tool flow

ReRAM Tile
96-ADCs (8-bits), 12×128×8DACs (1-bit), 96 crossbars, 128×128 crossbar size,
2-bit/cell resolution, 0.34 W, 0.37 ##!, Tech node – 32 nm [66]

SM-MC Chiplets: [43]

SM Chiplet
Volta architecture, 10 Tensor core, 64 KB SM register file, 96 KB L1 cache, 1530
MHz

MC Chiplet
L2 cache – 512 KB, 3.2 mm2, Tech node – 12 nm

DRAM Chiplets: [26]

DRAM
1-4 tier; 2 channel per tier; 16 banks per channel; 2GB per channel; Tech node –
12 nm

Interposer Parameters – 65nm [7]

$Bump dimension - 25$mX10$mX50$m; C4 Bump dimension - 250$mX70$m X600$m; Wire
Thickness - 1$m; Wire width – 1.5$m; Link frequency - 0.6ns/mm; Link length – 1.449mm

(shown in Fig. 7) integrating NeuroSim, BookSim2, AccelWatch, Nvdia-smi, and VAMPIRE to evaluate the performance
and power consumption of each architectural choices under consideration [47] [48] [49] [50]. The red block represents the
inputs to the evaluation framework, while the purple blocks are the outputs. The input to the evaluation framework is the
LLM model, the location of chiplets, their interconnection network, and link configuration. NeuroSim outputs the expected
compute power and latency for the ReRAM chiplets. BookSim2 simulator outputs communication power and NoI latency
for the entire system; VAMPIRE is used to estimate the DRAM power and execution time. We use a modified version of
the VAMPIRE simulator to compute access times (employing RAMULATOR) and expected energy consumption at
500MHz following the configuration illustrated in Table 1. The inter-chiplet traffic flowing through the NoI is generated
by the activations exchanged between the various chiplets. These include data exchange between the SM-MC chiplets,
among the ReRAM chiplets, as well as between ReRAM macro and MC chiplets. All the NoI topologies, considering the
detailed model based on Nvidia GRS parameters, are then simulated using the BookSim2 simulator [11] [51]. We employ
the tiling technique for matrix multiplication in SMs, where input data blocks are loaded from DRAM to MC. Tiling is a
standard program transformation technique that localizes the memory locations accessed among threads and the timing of
their accesses. AccelWatch considers the tiling strategy used in the GPU architecture, including the tile size, shape, and
overlap, to estimate the power consumption of the GPU. This allows for more accurate power modeling, especially in
scenarios where tiling has a significant impact on power consumption, such as in the case of Transformer models. Finally,
a thermal simulator (Hotspot 6.0) is used to model the thermal profile [52]. It should be noted that other thermal simulators
like MFIT, 3D-ICE, or PACT may also be used for similar accuracy [53] [54] [55]. For ReRAM chiplets, we use a modified

Table 3: Transformer Model and Parameters

dmodel
Layers
Heads
Parameters
(In millions)

Model
Transformer
Architecture

BERT-Base
Encoder Only
768
12
12
110
BERT-Large
Encoder Only
1024
24
16
340
BART-Base
Encoder-Decoder
768
12
12
140
BART-Large
Encoder-Decoder
1024
12
16
400
GPT-J
Decoder Only
4096
28
16
6700
Llama2-7B
Decoder Only
4096
32
32
7000

NeuroSim to implement the MVM operations involved in the Input Embedding and the FF layers in the Transformer model
[47]. Further, we use the cycle-accurate BookSim2 simulator to implement the interconnection network to connect the
chiplets via different NoI architectures [31] [48]. The inputs to the BookSim2 are the connectivity between NoI routers
and the inter-chiplet traffic traces for the Transformer model. The simulator outputs area, latency, and NoI energy
consumption. Considering the clock frequency of 1.2GHz, each 1.55 mm link can be traversed in one cycle [7]. The longer
links are divided into multiple stages, where each stage is 1.55 mm long. We employ the Nvidia ground-referenced
signaling (GRS) parameters for an interconnection network designed using 32nm technology to evaluate the NoI area and
power consumption [11].

We compare the performance and energy efficiency of the 2.5D-HI architecture with the recently proposed state-of-
the-art HAIMA and TransPIM architectures on various sequence lengths [2] [3]. We redesigned HAIMA and TransPIM
on the chiplet-based system as HAIMA_chiplet and TransPIM_chiplet, respectively. In both HAIMA_chiplet and
TransPIM_chiplet, we implement the same MOO algorithm as the proposed HI configurations to suitably place the chiplets,
routers, and associated links to give a fair optimization as we follow in comparative heterogeneous architectures. We
maintain an iso-chiplet configuration across all architectures and system sizes, where the physical area of each chiplet is
fixed.

4.1.2 Datasets and Transformer Workloads

We consider six transformer models in our experimental evaluation: BERT-Base, BERT-Large, BART-Large, Llama2-
7B, and GPT-J [30] [38] [37]. These models represent diverse transformer architectures, including Encoder-Decoder,
Encoder/Decoder only, MQA, and parallel MHA-FF architectures. BERT adopts an encoder-only transformer architecture,

Fig. 7: Illustration of tool flow for evaluating chiplet based heterogeneous integration for accelerating Transformer model.

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet

Latency (Normalized)

Latency (Normalized)

8

8

4

4

2

2

N = 64

N = 256

1

1

0.5

0.5

Input
Embedding

K Q V
Compute

Score
Compute

Feed Forward

Input
Embedding

K Q V
Compute

Score
Compute

Feed Forward

Figs. 8: Latency improvement for each computational kernel of the NoI architecture comparing 2.5D-HI with counterparts for (a) N=64
& (b) N=256 for 36 chiplet system.

while BART incorporates both encoder and decoder blocks. Llama2-7B and GPT-J are decoder-only models. Llama2-7B
uses MQA instead of MHA for attention computation, whereas GPT-J employs Parallel MHA-FF computation. Table 3
presents the different Transformer models considered in our experimental evaluation and their details, including model
dimensions, number of heads, number of layers, and number of parameters.

First, we evaluate a 36-chiplet system with BERT-Base. As the system size increases, we progressively employ models
with increased parameter counts to illustrate the scalability of the proposed HI architecture. Specifically, we extend our
evaluation to a 64-chiplet system with BERT-Large and BART-Large. Finally, we scale up to a 100-chiplet system with
Llama2-7Bs and GPT-J, where the total number of parameters are in billions.

4.2 Effect of Heterogenous Integration on Performance

We undertake a full system performance evaluation and compare the overall execution time and energy consumption
of 2.5D-HI with respect to the TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet for multiple sequence lengths. Following prior work,
TransPIM_chiplet consists of multiple auxiliary compute units (ACUs) to enable computing near DRAM chiplets. ACUs
perform vector reduction and Softmax function [2]. Other computational kernels are calculated with a bit-serial row-
parallel scheme. The token sharding technique is employed as the optimal dataflow strategy. This enables DRAM chiplets
to compute the partial attention score matrix independently without communicating with other chiplets. In the case of
HAIMA_chiplet, SRAM chiplets compute specific parts of the score computation (equation (5) & (6)). DRAM chiplets
are employed for implementing self-attention and FF layers. Following the original HAIMA framework, we use multiple
host chiplets to compute the arithmetic operations [3].

Figs. 8(a) & (b) show the latency profiles for different computational kernels for 2.5D-HI, TransPIM_chiplet, and
HAIMA_chiplet for two sequence lengths (64 and 256) as examples for 36 chiplet system. We observe that 2.5D-HI has
lower latency than both TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet for all the computing kernels. For self-attention (K, Q, V,
and Score computation), we see consistent performance gains over TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet. The tensor
cores of the SMs in 2.5D-HI enable the performance gain for self-attention. However, the performance gain is maximum
for the FF layer due to the efficient computation by ReRAM chiplets. The SMs efficiently accelerate MHA computation,
and the ReRAM layer computes the FF layer in parallel. In contrast, both HAIMA and TransPIM have latency overhead
in a chiplet-architecture. HAIMA maximizes the throughput by activating multiple banks within the DRAM-PIM
parallelly. In 2.5D systems, these banks need to be disintegrated into chiplets, which leads to higher power consumption
and frequent data exchange between SRAM and DRAM chiplets and gives rise to multiple contention paths. This leads to
higher latency overheads and reduced energy efficiency compared to 2.5D-HI and a simpler ring broadcast-based
communication dataflow proposed in TransPIM. Additionally, 2.5D-HI benefits from the fused score and Softmax

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet

Normalized Latency

4

2

1

0.5

64
256
1024
4096
64
256
1024
4096

BERT-Large
BART-Large

(a)

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet

Normalized Energy

2

1

0.5

64
256
1024
4096
64
256
1024
4096

BERT-Large
BART-Large

(b)

Figs. 9: End-to-end latency and energy improvement of the 2.5D-HI over its counterparts for 64 chiplet system running BERT-Large and
BART-Large.

calculations on the SM chiplets. However, HAIMA and TransPIM use additional host access, which prevents online
execution as it results in repeated data exchange with the host and hence incurs additional communication latency.
Although HAIMA outperforms TransPIM in score computation, TransPIM has faster execution and lower energy
consumption since it performs the FF network more efficiently. It should be noted that the implementation of SFC-based
NoI for the feed-forward layers in TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet is not feasible due to non-deterministic traffic
and continuous memory access dependencies, preventing the isolation of a dedicated sub-system exclusively for the FF
layer. With HI, this constraint is mitigated by having a dedicated computational platform (ReRAM chiplets) to enable FF
network processing.

We do not consider the ReRAM-only architecture, ReTransformer in this comparative performance evaluation for two
reasons [1]. First, the ReTransformer architecture only focuses on speeding up self-attention with no full system evaluation.
Second, the ReRAM-only architecture has endurance and reliability issues when accelerating Transformer models. For
example, consider the BERT model with h = 8 heads and sequence length P = 4096. In this case, for the ReRAM chiplet,
each with 16 tiles with 40 crossbar arrays of 128X128 storing 2 bits, we have 5KB of storage for a single write. In the case
of self-attention specifically, 2(, 2', 2) (512X64 matrices with each element represented in a 16-bit precision) and the

,, *, - computation generates about 10@ writes (~30Gb) per ReRAM cell per token. For longer sequence lengths such as
N=4096, the rewrites increase to 109A in a single encoder. In the case of subsequent #&, and "012, writes are of the
order As the models grow following previous trends (GPT4, Llama2-70B with 170B parameters), the write updates
would invoke serious endurance and reliability challenges for a ReRAM-only architecture [30]. 2.5D-HI avoids this
challenge by integrating heterogenous chiplets on the 2.5D interposer and accelerating only the static parts (i.e., no write
updates) of the computation using ReRAM chiplets. Hence, a heterogenous integration approach is imperative for
accelerating Transformer models.

4.2
System Scalability of the Heterogenous Architecture

We extend our framework to larger models on 64 and 100 chiplet systems to demonstrate system scalability. Figs. 9(a)
& (b) presents a comparative analysis showing full system (end-to-end) latency and energy for 2.5D-HI, TransPIM_chiplet,
and HAIMA_chiplet running BERT-Large and BART-Large on a 64-chiplet system. We observe that 2.5D-HI consistently
outperforms both TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet in terms of latency as well as energy consumption for all
considered sequence lengths. Notably, the performance gain for 2.5D-HI increases with the input sequence length, showing
scalability over sequence length. For instance, the latency gains increases from 4.6x to 5.45x as the input sequence length
increases from 64 to 4096 for BART-Large. Similarly, energy gain for 2.5D-HI also increases as the sequence length
increases with respect to HAIMA_chiplet and TransPIM chiplet. This performance enhancement is primarily due to
heterogenous integration enabled through 2.5D-HI, which ensures each computational kernel of the Transformer model is
executed on the appropriate hardware platform. Further, long-range communication is minimized on the 2.5D-HI system.
Unlike HAIMA_chiplet and TransPIM_chiplet, the Softmax computation is performed online on the SM cores without
necessitating any computation on the host device leading to communication bottlenecks. Further, during the execution of
the feed-forward layer, the entire data flow is confined within the ReRAM macro, interconnected as a SFC. This minimizes
contention issues due to limited data access outside of the ReRAM macro to other chiplets.

Next, we extend our system to 100 chiplet configurations and evaluate bigger transformer models featuring billions of
parameters. Figs. 10(a) & (b) show the end-to-end latency and energy for Llama2 and GPT-J on the 100 chiplet system.
We also consider the original TransPIM and HAIMA architectures to show the overall trend. We note up to 11.8× gain in
latency and 2.36× lower energy consumption with respect to our baselines HAIMA_chiplet and TransPIM_chiplet.
Moreover, we observe that the performance gain is up to 38x higher than the original TransPIM and HAIMA

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet
TransPIM
HAIMA

1
2
4
8
16
32

Normalized Latency

0.5

64
256
1024
4096
64
256
1024
4096

Llama-2
GPT-J

(a)

2.5D-HI
TransPIM_chiplet
HAIMA_chiplet
TransPIM
HAIMA

1
2
4
8
16

Normalized Energy

0.5

64
256
1024
4096
64
256
1024
4096

Llama-2
GPT-J

(b)

Fig. 10: End-to-end latency and energy improvements of the 2.5D-HI over its counterparts for 100 chiplet system running Llama2-7B and
GPT-J.

implementation. This is attributed to the limited number of banks that can be activated in parallel in the original 3D
architecture due to the thermal challenges discussed in the subsection below.

Moreover, Table 4 (a) & (b) shows the end-to-end execution time for the 36-chiplet system executing BERT-Base (for
n = 64 tokens) & 100-chiplet system executing GPT-J (for n = 64 tokens) respectively. It can be observed that 2.5D-HI
consistently outperforms all its counterparts. 2.5D-HI architecture demonstrates both model scalability and sequence
scalability, exhibiting faster execution as the transformer model size and input sequence length increase. In contrast,
HAIMA_chiplet and TransPIM_chiplet face scalability challenges when accommodating larger model sizes. This is
attributed to the increased communication overhead for both TransPIM_chiplet and HAIMA_chiplet, with the number of
hops increasing as the system size grows due to long-range communication. These observations underscore the
effectiveness of heterogenous integration and the NoI design in addressing the demands of larger-scale Transformer
models, exhibiting superior scalability and performance.

4.3
Three-dimensional Heterogeneous Integration

We now explore three-dimensional (3D) heterogeneous integration (3D-HI) for transformer model acceleration, where
planar tiers are vertically integrated with each tier consisting of multiple ReRAM or SM-MC chiplets. This 3D integration
approach brings chiplets closer and helps reduce inter-chiplet data transfer costs. Further, vertical links provide an
additional degree of freedom for data exchange, which helps to reduce congestion in many-to-few traffic scenarios detailed
in Section 3. Fig. 2 illustrates a conceptual SM-MC and ReRAM 3D-HI architecture consisting of vertically integrated
tiers, each with either ReRAM or SRAM chiplets. Note that both the SM-MC chiplets and ReRAM chiplets cannot be

Table 4: Absolute time of execution for different architectural configuration for (a) 36-chiplet system executing BERT-Base for n = 64
tokens; (b) 100-chiplet system executing GPT-J for n = 64 tokens. Reported time is in milliseconds (ms).

Time Execution (ms)
36 chiplets
100 chiplets

TransPIM_chiplet
210ms
1435ms

HAIMA_chiplet
340ms
975ms

2.5D-HI
50ms
143ms

integrated on the same tier due to technology limitations. The planar tiers are connected vertically with TSV-based links
[56] [57] [58].

While 3D integration offers significant advantages, it also increases power density, leading to thermal hotspots.
Consequently, it becomes necessary to consider the peak temperature of the system when optimizing for performance in
3D systems. Our existing MOO framework presented in Eq. 10 does not consider thermal as an objective and focuses on
maximizing performance. Hence, we need additional design objectives beyond those listed in Eq. 11 through Eq. 13.
Hence, we include additional design objectives for 3D-HI.

The peak temperature of each core can be estimated using the approximate thermal model, which determines the
temperature using horizontal and vertical heat flow [59]. The vertical heat flow can be determined by dividing the system
into vertical columns. The temperature of a core located at layer k from the sink due to the vertical heat flow is given by:

6

&

6

â(P, v) = q

ã#$,& q

å;ç + å# q

#$,& (16)

&=9

;=9

&=9

where #$,&(F) is the power consumption of the core at layer : from the sink in the vertical column P, å; is the thermal
resistance in the vertical direction, and å# is the thermal resistance of the base layer [59].
The horizontal heat flow is represented through the maximum temperature difference in a layer.

éâ(v) = max

B â$,6 − min

B â$,6 (17)

Combining both horizontal and vertical heat flow models, the objective becomes minimizing the worst-case temperature.

B,D {â(P, v)}dbmax

â(h) = bmax

D {éâ(v)}d (18)

Furthermore, 3D integration with heterogeneous chiplets introduces additional design complexities in comparison to
the homogeneous counterpart. Specifically, ReRAM chiplets have higher thermal susceptibility when compared to the
CMOS-based SM-MC chiplets [60]. ReRAM cells store weights as conductance, which is temperature-dependent, making
them susceptible to thermal fluctuations and noise [61]. This can lead to erroneous computations and potentially degrade
the inference accuracy of the underlying model [62]. The thermal objective defined in Eq. 18 does not capture the effect
of non-idealities on ReRAM cells [63] [64]. Hence, we incorporate an additional objective to capture sensitivity of ReRAM
core to thermal noise. The effect of thermal noise on the ReRAM conductance value can be represented by the following.

;A:DC(h) = ; J0, K4í. ,#. âE!E20. p

-
M (19)

Here í represents ReRAM ideal conductance, ,# is the Boltzmann constant, p denotes the operating frequency, and - is
the voltage difference across the two ReRAM terminals [62] [65]. We consider the temperature of ReRAM chiplets in the
context of the ReRAM noise as the optimization objective.

Considering the performance, thermal, and ReRAM noise objectives, the updated MOO formulations for the design of
3D-HI is as follows:

h∗= = i(h), j(h), â(h), ;A:DC(h)R (20)

3D-HI
HAIMA
TransPIM
3D-HI
HAIMA-temp
TransPIM-temp

10

0
25
50
75
100
125
150

8

Execution Time

Normalized

Temp (c)

6

4

2

0

64
512
2048
64
512
2048
64
512
2048
64
512
2048

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
BART-Base
BART-Large

(a)

3D-HI
HAIMA
TransPIM
3D-HI-temp
HAIMA-temp
TransPIM-temp

0
25
50
75
100
125
150

1
2
4
8
16
32
64

Normalized EDP

Temp (c)

0.5

64
512
2048
64
512
2048
64
512
2048
64
512
2048

BERT-Base
BERT-Large
BART-Base
BART-Large

(b)
Fig. 11: Normalized (a) execution time and temperature, and (b) EDP and temperature, when compared to the baseline 3D-HI for different
transformer models with varying sequence length n.

We now comapre end-to-end latency and energy of 3D-HI with the baslines HAIMA and TransPIM. However, unlike

3D-HI, where we perform joint performance-thermal-noise optimization, HAIMA and TransPIM did not consider thermal
effects while designing the architecture. For instance, HAIMA's configuration suggests integration of up to eight compute
units per bank, with each compute unit dissipating 3.138W of power. Under the assumption that multiple compute units in
a bank are operating concurrently as suggested in HAIMA, the power density of the HBM bank will be order of magniture

higher than modern GPUs given the standard HBM2 die area of 53.15 mm5. Similarly, TransPIM consists of 8 stacks of
HBMs connected through TSV. The thermal resistance increases as we move up in the stack and away from the heat sink.
Consequently, additional power dissipation through compute units in banks can increase DRAM temperature quickly and
create hotspots. Hence, we show system temperature along with execution and energy in our evaluation.

Fig. 11(a) presents the overall performance as well as steady state system temperature for real-world transformer models
and input sequence lengths to conduct a thorough performance and thermal analysis. Notably, we observe that both
HAIMA and TransPIM exhibit elevated temperatures, with a minimum temp of 120°C for any transformer model. The
maximum temperature reaches 131°C in the case of the fused MHA-FF model where MHA and FF layers are computed
parallelly. Note that the maximum temperature threshold for DRAM is 95°C beyond which it results in data loss or
corruption. These results underscore the thermal infeasibility of both HAIMA and TransPIM, necessitating the exploration
of dynamic voltage frequency scaling. However, exploring such techniques fall beyond the scope of the current work.
Conversely, 3D-HI proves to be thermally realizable, consistently achieving speedup across various transformer models
and sizes. Fig. 11(b) illustrates the normalized EDP along with steady state temperature for the transformer models and
input sequence lengths considered above. We consider EDP as the relevant metric as it captures both performance and
energy in a single term. 3D-HI outperforms the baselines, exhibiting increased EDP gains as the transformer model size
and input sequence length increase, thereby showing scalability. For instance, the EDP of 3D-HI is an order of magnitude

better (14.5×) than HAIMA for the BERT-Large model with n = 2056. In summary, 3D-HI demonstrates superior
performance and temperature characteristics compared to the baselines.

5 CONCLUSION

The end-to-end transformer model exhibits significant heterogeneity in its computational kernels, necessitating the
integration of different types of hardware modules on a single system for high-performance and energy-efficient
acceleration. This paper considers different heterogeneous chiplets to design a multi-chiplet architecture called 2.5D-HI
for accelerating Transformer models. 2.5D-HI uses SM-MC chiplets for multi-head attention and ReRAM chiplets for the
feed-forward network, which optimize both achievable energy efficiency and throughput. The heart of the 2.5D-HI
platform is a NoI architecture that enables efficient computing kernel to chiplet mapping for the complex interactions
among heterogenous chiplets. Further, vertical integration on top of a 2.5D interposer helps to enhance overall system
performance and alleviates the issue of memory bottlenecks. Experimental results demonstrate that 2.5D-HI lowers the
latency and energy consumption by up to 11.8× and 2.36× with respect to an equivalent state-of-the-art chiplet-based
platform. Notably, 2.5D-HI exhibits versatility across various transformer models/sizes and shows consistent speedup
irrespective of the model.

REFERENCES

[1] X. Yang, B. Yan, H. Li and Y. Chen, "ReTransformer: ReRAM-based Processing-in-Memory Architecture for Transformer

Acceleration," in ICCAD, San Diego, 2020.

[2] M. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Kang and T. Rosing, "TransPIM: A Memory-based Acceleration via Software-Hardware Co-Design for

Transformer," in HPCA, Korea, 2022.

[3] Y. Ding et al., "HAIMA: A Hybrid SRAM and DRAM Accelerator-in-Memory Architecture for Transformer," in DAC, 2023.

[4] A. Kannan, N. Jerger and G. Loh, "Enabling interposer-based disintegration of multi-core processors," in Proceedings of the 48th

International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO-48), New York, 2015.

[5] G. Krishnan et al., "SIAM: Chiplet-based Scalable In-Memory Acceleration with Mesh for Deep Neural Networks," ACM Trans.

Embed. Comput. Syst, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1-24, 2021.

[6] S. Bharadwaj, J. Yin, B. Beckmann and T. Krishna, "Kite: A Family of Heterogeneous Interposer Topologies Enabled via Accurate

Interconnect Modeling," in 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2020.

[7] P. Vivet et al., "IntAct: A 96-Core Processor With Six Chiplets 3D-Stacked on an Active Interposer With Distributed Interconnects

and Integrated Power Management," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 56, no. 1, 2021.

[8] H. Sharma et al., "Achieving Datacenter-scale Performance through Chiplet-based Manycore Architectures," in DATE, 2023.

[9] H. Sharma, U. Y. Ogras, A. Kalyanraman and P. P. Pande, "A Dataflow-Aware Network-on-Interposer for CNN Inferencing in the

Presence of Defective Chiplets," IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 43, no. 11,
2024.

[10] H. Sharma et al., "SWAP: A Server-Scale Communication-Aware Chiplet-Based Manycore PIM Accelerator," IEEE Transactions on

Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4145-4156, 2022.

[11] Y. Shao et al., "Simba: Scaling Deep-Learning Inference with Multi-Chip-Module-Based Architecture," in In Proceedings of the

52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO '52), New York, 2019.

[12] Z. Tan, H. Cai, R. Dong and K. Ma, "NN-Baton: DNN Workload Orchestration and Chiplet Granularity Exploration for Multichip

Accelerators," International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2021.

[13] A. Graening, S. Pal and P. Gupta, "Chiplets: How Small is too Small?," in DAC, 2023.

[14] P. Iff et al., "HexaMesh: Scaling to Hundreds of Chiplets with an Optimized Chiplet Arrangement," in DAC, 2023.

[15] S. Sridharan, J. Stevens, K. Roy and A. Raghunathan, "X-Former: In-Memory Acceleration of Transformers," in arXiv:2303.07470,

2023.

[16] H. Wang, Z. Zhang and S. Han, "Spatten: Efficient sparse attention architecture with cascade token and head pruning," in ArXiv,

vol. abs/2012.09852, , 2020.

[17] T. J. Ham et al., "A3: Accelerating attention mechanisms in neural networks with approximation," in HPCA, 2020.

[18] M. He et al., "Newton: A dram- maker’s accelerator-in-memory (aim) architecture for machine learning," in MICRO, 2020.

[19] T. Tambe et al., "EdgeBERT: Sentence-Level Energy Optimizations for Latency-Aware Multi-Task NLP Inference," in MICRO, 2021.

[20] S. Tuli and N. K. Jha, "AccelTran: A Sparsity-Aware Accelerator for Dynamic Inference with Transformers," in arXiv:2302.14705,

2023.

[21] S. Tuli and N. K. Jha, "TransCODE: Co-design of Transformers and Accelerators for Efficient Training and Inference," in

arXiv:2303.14882, 2023.

[22] C. Kwon et al., "25.4 A 20nm 6GB Function-In-Memory DRAM, Based on HBM2 with a 1.2TFLOPS Programmable Computing Unit

Using Bank-Level Parallelism, for Machine Learning Applications," in ISSCC, 2021.

[23] J. Fang, Y. Yu and C. Z. J. Zhao, "TurboTransformers: An Efficient GPU Serving System For Transformer Models," in DPCC, 2021.

[24] "Microsoft Corporation. 2022. Megatron-DeepSpeed.," [Online]. Available:

DeepSpeed. [Accessed June 2024].

[25] "Nvidia Corporation. 2016. NVIDIA Scalable Hierarchical Aggregation and Reduction Protocol (SHARP).," [Online]. Available:

//docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/sharpv300. [Accessed June 2024].

[26] J. H. Kim et al., "Aquabolt-XL: Samsung HBM2-PIM with in-memory processing for ML accelerators and beyond," in IEEE Hot

Chips 33 Symposium (HCS), Palo Alto, 2021.

[27] M. Stefano et al., "Nvidia tensor core programmability, performance & precision.," IEEE international parallel and distributed

processing symposium workshops (IPDPSW), 2018.

[28] S. Resch et al., "On Endurance of Processing in (Nonvolatile) Memory," in ISCA, 2023.

[29] S. Pati et al., "Demystifying BERT: implications for accelerator design," in arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08335,, 2021.

[30] "LLaMA Collection of Foundation Models.," Meta, [Online]. Available: [Accessed 22

June 2023].

[31] H. Sharma et al., "Florets for Chiplets: Data Flow-aware High-Performance and Energy-efficient Network-on-Interposer for CNN

Inference Tasks," ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1-21, 2023.

[32] M. Haque, A. Kalyanaraman, A. Dhingra, N. Abu-Lail and K. Graybeal, "DNAjig: a new approach for building DNA

nanostructures.," in International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, 2009.

[33] P. Xu and S. Tirthapura, "A lower bound on proximity preservation by space filling curves.," IEEE 26th International Parallel and

Distributed Processing Symposium, pp. 1295-1305, 2012.

[34] P. Xu, N. Cuong and S. Tirthapura, ""Onion curve: A space filling curve with near-optimal clustering." In 2018 )," in IEEE 34th

International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), 2018.

[35] M. Lindenbaum and C. Gotsman, "The metric properties of discrete space-filling curves," IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,

vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 794-797, 1996.

[36] T. Dao, D. Y. Fu, S. R. A. Ermon and C. Ré, "FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness," in

arXiv:2205.14135, 2022.

[37] D. Jacob et al., "Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding."," arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

[38] "Alpaca Foundation Model with 7B Parameters.," Stanford, [Online]. Available:

lab/stanford_alpaca#data-release. [Accessed 22 June 2023].

[39] B. Joardar et al., "Learning-Based Application-Agnostic 3D NoC Design for Heterogeneous Manycore Systems," IEEE Transactions

on Computers, vol. 68, no. 6, 2019.

[40] W. Choi et al., "“On-chip communication network for efficient training of deep convolutional networks on heterogeneous

manycore systems,”," IEEE Transaction on Computers., vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 672-686, 2018.

[41] B. K. Joardar et al., "3D NoC-enabled heterogeneous manycore architectures for accelerating CNN training: performance and

thermal trade-offs," in International Symposium of Network-on-Chip, 2017.

[42] K. Deb, A. Pratap and S. Agarwal, "A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II," IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary

Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182-197, 2002.

[43] J. Zhe et al., "Dissecting the NVIDIA volta GPU architecture via microbenchmarking.," arXiv:1804.06826, 2018.

[44] L. Song, Q. Xuehai, H. Li and Y. Chen, "PipeLayer: A Pipelined ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Deep Learning," in HPCA, 2017.

[45] G. Krishnan et al., "Interconnect-aware Area and Energy Optimization for In-Memory Acceleration of DNNs," IEEE Design & Test,

vol. 37, no. 6, 2020.

[46] "DRAM PHY Architecture," [Online]. Available: [Accessed 3 June 2024].

[47] X. Peng et al., "DNN+NeuroSim: An End-to-End Benchmarking Framework for Compute-in-Memory Accelerators with Versatile

Device Technologies," in International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2019.

[48] N. Jiang et al., "A Detailed and Flexible Cycle-Accurate Network-on-Chip Simulator," in IEEE ISPASS, 2013.

[49] H. Luo et al., "Ramulator 2.0: A Modern, Modular, and Extensible DRAM Simulator," in arXiv:2308.11030, 2023.

[50] V. Kandiah et al., "AccelWattch: A Power Modeling Framework for Modern GPUs," 2021.

[51] B. Zimmer et al., "A 0.32–128 TOPS, Scalable Multi-Chip-Module-Based Deep Neural Network Inference Accelerator With

Ground-Referenced Signaling in 16 nm," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 55, no. 4, 2020.

[52] K. Skadron, M. R. Stan, W. Huang, S. Velusamy, K. Sankaranarayanan and D. Tarjan, "Temperature-Aware Microarchitecture,"

ISCA, pp. 2-13, 2003.

[53] L. Pfromm et al., "MFIT: Multi-Fidelity Thermal Modeling for 2.5 D and 3D Multi-Chiplet Architectures," in arXiv preprint

arXiv:2410.09188., 2024.

[54] Z. Yuan, P. Shukla, S. Chetoui, S. Nemtzow, S. Reda and A. K. Coskun, "PACT: An extensible parallel thermal simulator for

emerging integration and cooling technologies.," IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and
Systems, 2021.

[55] A. Sridhar, A. Vincenzi, M. Ruggiero, T. Brunschwiler and D. Atienza, "3D-ICE: Fast compact transient thermal modeling for 3D ICs

with inter-tier liquid cooling," Vols. International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2010.

[56] S. Van Huylenbroeck et al., "Small Pitch, High Aspect Ratio Via-Last TSV Module," IEEE ECTC, pp. 43-49, 2016.

[57] M. F. Chen, F. C. Chen, W. C. Chiou and D. C. H. Yu, " System on integrated chips (SoIC(TM) for 3D heterogeneous integration,"

ECTC, 2019.

[58] R. Agarwal et al., "3D Packaging for Heterogeneous Integration," ECTC, 2022.

[59] J. Cong et al., "A thermal-driven floorplanning algorithm for 3D ICs," ICCAD, 2004.

[60] G. L. Loi et al., "A Thermally-Aware Performance Analysis of Vertically Integrated (3-D) Processor-Memory Hierarchy," in DAC,

2006.

[61] Z. He, J. Lin, R. Ewetz, J. Yuan and D. Fan, "Noise Injection Adaption: End-to-End ReRAM Crossbar Non-ideal Effect Adaption for

Neural Network Mapping," in Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2019.

[62] Z. He et al., "Noise Injection Adaption: End-to-End ReRAM Crossbar Non-ideal Effect Adaption for Neural Network Mapping," in

DAC, 2019.

[63] Z. He, J. Lin, R. Ewetz, J. -S. Yuan and D. Fan, "Noise Injection Adaption: End-to-End ReRAM Crossbar Non-ideal Effect Adaption

for Neural Network Mapping," in Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2019.

[64] S. Hyein, M. Kang and L.-S. Kim, "A thermal-aware optimization framework for ReRAM-based deep neural network

acceleration," in International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, 2020.

[65] M. V. Beigi and G. Memik, "Thermal-aware optimizations of ReRAM-based neuromorphic computing systems.," in Design

Automation Conference (DAC), 2018.

[66] A. Shafiee et al, "ISAAC: a convolutional neural network accelerator with in-situ analog arithmetic in crossbars.," in ISCA, Seoul,

Korea, 2016.

[67] T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu and X. Qiu, "A Survey of Transformers," in ArXiv preprint ArXiv:2106.04554, 2021.