Michele Polese, Mischa Dohler, Falko Dressler, Melike Erol-Kantarci,
Rittwik Jana, Raymond Knopp, Tommaso Melodia

Abstract—Innovation and standardization in 5G have brought
advancements to every facet of the cellular architecture. This
ranges from the introduction of new frequency bands and signal-
ing technologies for the radio access network (RAN), to a core
network underpinned by micro-services and network function
virtualization (NFV). However, like any emerging technology, the
pace of real-world deployments does not instantly match the pace
of innovation. To address this discrepancy, one of the key aspects
under continuous development is the RAN with the aim of making
it more open, adaptive, functional, and easy to manage.
In this paper, we highlight the transformative potential of
embracing novel cellular architectures by transitioning from
conventional systems to the progressive principles of Open RAN.
This promises to make 6G networks more agile, cost-effective,
energy-efficient, and resilient. It opens up a plethora of novel use
cases, ranging from ubiquitous support for autonomous devices
to cost-effective expansions in regions previously underserved.
The principles of Open RAN encompass: (i) a disaggregated
architecture with modular and standardized interfaces; (ii)
cloudification, programmability and orchestration; and (iii) AI-
enabled data-centric closed-loop control and automation. We first
discuss the transformative role Open RAN principles have played
in the 5G era. Then, we adopt a system-level approach and
describe how these Open RAN principles will support 6G RAN
and architecture innovation. We qualitatively discuss potential
performance gains that Open RAN principles yield for specific 6G
use cases. For each principle, we outline the steps that research,
development and standardization communities ought to take to
make Open RAN principles central to next-generation cellular
network designs.

arXiv:2312.02746v1 [cs.NI] 5 Dec 2023

Index Terms—O-RAN, Network Intelligence, 5G/6G, Machine
Learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

The wireless internet plays a fundamental role today in
supporting societies and economies around the world, un-
derpinned by cellular connectivity that is widely used by

Core network
RAN
Limited supply chain

Complex and expensive update cycles

Control

User
plane

plane
NF

Exclusive spectrum access

NF

NF

NF

5G Core

SDAP

RRC

PDCP

RLC
MAC

PHY

RF

5G RAN

4G RAN

4G Core (EPC)

x

Limited/no control
knobs and analytics x

Limited flexibility and adaptability

Fig. 1: Components and abstractions of 4G and 5G cellular networks, with
the limitations associated to the current cellular architecture and deployment
models.

by discussing two emerging opportunities, notably dynamic
spectrum sharing in Section VIII and self-configurable joint
access and backhaul in Section IX. We conclude in Section X.

II. 4G AND 5G CELLULAR NETWORK ARCHITECTURE

The design of cellular networks separates functionalities
across different elements—the RAN and core network, in a
horizontal split—and planes—the user and the control planes
(UP and CP), in a vertical split [27]. They support connectivity
in mobile scenarios and provide exclusive spectrum access
to licensed and shared bands through centralized scheduling.
Compared to other popular wireless technologies such as Wi-
Fi, cellular networks support a more widespread coverage
layer with a consistent experience also in mobile scenario, and
can extend performance guarantees to the end users. However,
existing deployments still present limitations, e.g., they come
with limited reconfigurability and adaptability to use cases and
users’ requirements and rely partly on manual optimization.
In this section, we review the high-level characteristics
of cellular network architectures that have been typically
deployed in 4G and 5G networks, primarily with 3GPP LTE
and NR [1, 27], and discuss opportunities for the ecosystem
to accelerate the pace of innovation.

A. Access and Core Network

C. Limitations and Theory-Implementation Gap

These cellular network design principles are well-thought
and the outcome of years of evolution of cellular systems, with
5G networks reaching hundreds of Mbps of throughput in typ-
ical scenarios [8, 30, 31]. However, there is still a gap between
cellular deployments and the rich set of features available in
the specifications from 3GPP and in the technical literature
from the wireless and networking research communities. The
capabilities of cellular networks are today mostly focused on
broadband applications, and lag behind the vision of what
applications could achieve in mobile scenarios:

• First, the complexity, scale and performance requirements
as well as lack of a clear monetizable use-case of
production-grade cellular networks lead operators and
thus vendors to focus on a subset of well-tested features
to mainly support mobile broadband applications. This
limits the potential of cellular network deployments, as
well as the number of parameters that can be tuned and
optimized in production. A further setback is that very
few operators have upgraded to 5G standalone networks,
complicating the support for different kinds of use cases
at the same time, e.g., ultra-low latency data streaming for
industrial control on a public network while also serving
video streaming to residential users.

• Second, the limited flexibility extends to spectrum, the
most valuable resource when deploying wireless systems.
Cellular networks, so far, have been mostly deployed
on licensed spectrum, which provides guarantees for no
or limited interference, but also limits the bandwidth to
small chunks and disaggregated chunks of spectrum (at
least below 6 GHz). More flexible radios and spectrum
access systems can pave the way for more efficient spec-
trum utilization and an overall increase in the available
bandwidth.

B. User and Control Plane

• Third, there are limited options for the deployment of the
network itself. Whilst 3GPP interfaces and the standard
itself are completely open, market consolidation has led
to a small set of RAN vendors. Whilst vendor interop-
erability is ensured via well-tested Xn interfaces, further
disaggregation could potentially spurn more innovation
and also increase the resiliency of the supply chain [32–
34].

Coverage
Innovation

Cloud

Spectrum sharing

AI

Non-
terrestrial

gNB

gNB

RICs

Resiliency

Dynamic self-
backhaul

RAN

SMOs
Programmability

Disaggregation

Scaling

gNB RU/DU/CU

Optimization

gNB RU/DU/CU

gNB RU/DU/CU

Control

Cost and
complexity

Automation

Softwarization

Compute
Acceleration

Energy
Efficiency

Fig. 2: Foundational architectural principles of next-generation cellular networks (black), overlayed on the Open RAN architecture (orange), and with 6G
target Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) (blue) related to energy efficiency, cost and complexity, innovation, coverage, and resiliency.

• Lower deployment and operational costs and com-
plexity — upgrading cellular networks across generations
is a complex and costly exercise for network operators,
with cycles that take years to complete (e.g., one major
U.S. operator moved commercial traffic to a 5G stan-
dalone core network in 2022, three years after launching
a commercial 5G service [40]). Similarly, operations
require careful planning and supervision with humans
in the loop, increasing expenses and limiting the scope
of optimization to few selected parameters and services.
Future wireless systems will need streamlined and auto-
mated processes for network deployment and operations.

the diversity of the supply chain and telecom ecosystem and
stymieing fast-paced competition and innovation.

III. EMPOWERING THE 6G CELLULAR ARCHITECTURE
WITH OPEN RAN PRINCIPLES

In this section, we describe how 6G can benefit from
the adoption of a new, system-level approach for the de-
sign and deployment of the network architecture, leading
to a streamlined transition of innovation from research and
standardization to production. It is important to distinguish
between standards for key functionalities (as mainly done by
the 3GPP); for enabling a softwarized/cloudified deployment
with closed-loop control (e.g., O-RAN Alliance); and the
actual deployments.
The quest that led the development of 4G and 5G networks
was driven by improvements in spectral efficiency (e.g., higher
order modulations and new coding schemes), access to spec-
trum (e.g., new frequency bands at mmWaves), and support for
machine connectivity and low-latency systems. Future wireless
systems will also target improvements in complementary KPIs,
as shown in the blue circles in Fig. 2:

• Faster innovation cycles — once a network is opera-
tional, deploying and testing new features and function-
alities, e.g., features from new 3GPP releases, represents
an additional effort and cost, as it could lead to Service
Level Agreement (SLA) requirements violation and risk
of service disruption. This slows down innovation and
prevents a quick adoption of new techniques and solutions
in cellular networks—a key challenge to address in next-
generation networks to unlock faster transition from lab
research to cutting-edge commercial products.

• High resiliency — the cellular infrastructure is critical
to our society, and major downtime of a carrier infras-
tructure often causes significant losses for various sectors
of the economy [44]. Therefore, increasing the resiliency
of the network infrastructure to different incidents (either
software-based, or caused, for example, by power outage
or weather events) is paramount as we make cellular
connectivity even more diffused and essential.
This is in addition to further improvements in throughput
and latency, e.g., through ultra-wide band networks in the sub-
terahertz spectrum [45, 46]. To achieve these target, there is an
opportunity to rethink the cellular architecture and operations
with a holistic approach which can provide more gains than
the improvements in the lower layers of the RAN protocol
stack (e.g., the redesign the physical layer with AI [47, 48]).

A. 6G requirements and Open RAN principles

programmable RAN

Packet
in

Packet
out

RAN
Function 1

RAN
Function 2

RAN
Function N
Radio

IV. ENABLERS: SOFTWARIZATION, PROGRAMMABILITY,
AND VIRTUALIZATION

Distributed Virtualization Layer

CPU
GPU
FPGA

Heterogeneous Compute

Fig. 3: Representation of a cellular system where a virtualization layer enables
software-based, programmable network functions.

domains is a streamlined process if compared to developing
hardware systems. Further, a software-based approach allows
adopting best practices from the software industry, including
cloud compute solutions, micro-services for resilient and easily
scalable platforms, and fast deployment cycles with quality
guaranteed by a continuous testing, integration and deploy-
ment cycle, as we discuss in Sec. VI.
On the other hand, softwarization, as discussed above,
introduces performance challenges related to the implemen-
tation and performance tuning of DSP routines. This has led
to (i) effort to define minimum and desirable performance
requirements for whitebox hardware that supports Open RAN
deployments; and to (ii) the emergence of multiple pro-
grammable solutions for DSP acceleration, including Graph-
ics Processing Units (GPUs) [63], Field Programmable Gate
Arrays (FPGAs) [64], or dedicated systems-on-a-chip [65].
Extending generic compute with programmable accelerators
combines reconfigurability with fast and massively parallel
signal processing, and leads to platforms and systems which
are easier to upgrade, maintain, and source when compared to
dedicated application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs).

A. Implementation and Research Directions

Service Management and Orchestration Framework

O2

O-CU-CP
O-CU-UP
RRC
PDCP

Non-real-time RIC

SDAP
PDCP

A1

O1

O-RAN Interfaces
3GPP Interfaces

E2

Near-real-time RIC

E2

O-DU
RLC
MAC
PHY-high

Scrambling

E2
O-CU-CP

O-eNB

X2-c, Xn-c,
NG-c

Modulation

Other CUs

Layer mapping

E1

Precoding
RE mapping

X2-u, Xn-u,
NG-u

O-CU-UP

F1-c
F1-u

O-RU
PHY-low

O-DU

iFFT/CP
Precoding

Open FH CUS- and M-Planes

RF

Beamforming

Open FH M-Plane

O-RU

DAC/ADC

O-Cloud

Fig. 4: RAN disaggregation and open interfaces. Adapted from [19].

Fig. 4. The CU and the DU are connected through the E1 and
F1 interfaces, respectively, defined by 3GPP [27, 68]. The CU
also supports connectivity (e.g., for handover) to other CUs,
eNBs, and to the core network components through the Xn,
X2, and NG interfaces, respectively, also defined by the 3GPP.

how to maintain high efficiency, in terms of computing power,
energy, and cost, when comparing to traditional, monolithic
devices, which are often highly optimized and accelerated by
dedicated ASICs. Possible approaches can rely on statistical
multiplexing and scaling, so that savings are achieved on
average compared to traditional systems, and on improvements
and optimization related to software design and hardware
platforms targeting telecom and DSP workloads.

The DU is connected to one or multiple RUs through the
O-RAN Fronthaul interface, which builds on an enhanced
version of the common public radio interface called eCPRI.
It provides a reliable and synchronized transport layer for
control messages and user data [69]. The fronthaul interface
is implemented through four planes. The user plane carries in
phase and quadrature (I/Q) samples corresponding to trans-
port blocks to be transmitted. The control plane is used to
signal when these I/Q samples need to be transmitted, and to
anticipate uplink and random access slots in which the RU
needs to process incoming signals. The synchronization plane
takes care of maintaining a nanosecond-level synchronization
between the DU and the RU through the Precision Time
Protocol (PTP). Finally, the management plane connects the
RU to the Service Management and Orchestration (SMO)
(either directly, or through the DU), and can be used to push
configurations to the radio, including, for example, beamform-
ing codebooks [70].

V. OPEN RAN PRINCIPLE #1: DISAGGREGATION AND
OPEN INTERFACES

A. Implementation and Research Directions

Automated Interface Generation. While openness allows
for a mix and match of components and vendors, it comes with
its own challenges associated to integration, interoperability,
and interface generation. A key research direction involves
understanding how AI and natural language processing tools
can be used to automatically generate the software implemen-
tation for the open interfaces based on their specifications.
Similarly, AI can be used to automate testing and facilitate the
integration of products from different vendors, identifying the
incompatibilities, possible divergence of the implementations
from the specifications, and security issues. Automated inter-
face generation and testing decreases the time it takes from
specification development to implementation availability, and
reduces one of the pain and risk points associated to O-RAN,
i.e., interoperability in a disaggregated environment.
Extending E2 Service Models. Similarly, automated inter-
face generation can also encompass the E2 service models. As
discussed above, the O-RAN Alliance has defined a basic set
of service models for RAN control and streaming of telemetry
and KPMs. Additional service models, however, need to be
developed to enable additional functionalities and control, as,
for example, for spectrum sharing and Integrated Access and
Backhaul (IAB) optimization (as discussed in Sec. IX). A
system design challenge involves creating service models for
a wide range of functionalities and emerging use cases while
being able to operate within parameters specified by the 3GPP
for its CUs and DUs. Additionally, it is important to define
specific profiles and a fundamental set of features that must
be incorporated by RAN equipment and software vendors to
achieve O-RAN compliance.
Interface Efficiency. An additional research area is related
to the efficiency of the data and control communications over
the open interfaces, especially for those which are data-rate
intensive and extremely sensitive to timing, e.g., the fronthaul
interface. In this case, the data rate of the interface should not
scale linearly with the bandwidth used for wireless commu-
nications, e.g., using advanced compression and aggregation
techniques, to enable efficient massive MIMO, bandwidth scal-
ing beyond the 400 MHz of 3GPP NR, or carrier aggregation.
Theoretical models are also needed to understand the impact
on latency and energy efficiency as compared to monolithic
architectures, considering both functionalities in 3GPP user
and control planes and control and optimization introduced
by Open RAN elements.

A. Orchestration and Automation

VI. OPEN RAN PRINCIPLE #2: TOWARD CLOUD-NATIVE
APPROACHES FOR THE RAN

B. Security

Challenges and limitations

Control and learning objective

Input data
Timescale

Architecture

and services)

Controller

Supported by O-RAN
For further study

Orchestration of large-scale
deployments, management of

O-Cloud
O2
Policies, models, slicing

Infrastructure KPMs

Non-real-time

Non-real-time RIC / SMO

> 1000

Data,
analytics,
telemetry

Control,
commands,
policies

Service status

> 1 s

Dynamic service provisioning

heterogeneous services

O1

A1

gNB

CU KPMs
e.g., number of
sessions, PDCP traffic

Process streams from
multiple CUs and sessions

Near-real-time

User Session Management
e.g., load balancing, handover

> 100

10-1000 ms

CU

Near-real-time

E2

RAN
Function N

RIC

F1

MAC KPMs
e.g., PRB utilization,

Small time scales, control

Near-real-time

Medium Access Management
e.g., scheduling policy, RAN slicing

Packet
out
Virtualizati

> 100

Packet
in

many DUs/UEs

10-1000 ms

buffering

DU

MAC/PHY KPMs
e.g., PRB utilization,

on Layer

Custom real-time loops not

Radio Management
e.g., scheduling, beamforming

Real-time

Open FH

~10

Mobile devices

supported

< 10 ms

channel estimation

RU

Device- and RU-level

I/Q samples
Real-time

Device DL/UL Management

1

standardization

< 1 ms

e.g., modulation

Closed-loop control

Fig. 5: Closed-loop control in the Open RAN architecture. Based on [9, 19].

before and after deployment. Before deployment, tampering
with training data can affect the training process itself. Simi-
larly, backdoors can be added to deep learning models to ma-
nipulate model responses to specific inputs. After deployment,
vulnerabilities can arise through adversarial machine learning
and by corrupting input data during inference. Therefore, it
is necessary to research resilient AI/ML solutions for Open
RAN that safeguard against vulnerabilities stemming from
data manipulation, as, for example, employing techniques
such as autoencoders (as demonstrated in [82]), contrastive
learning [90], and contaminated best arm identification [91],
among other techniques.

VII. OPEN RAN PRINCIPLE #3: AI-BASED CLOSED-LOOP
CONTROL

Efficient and Explainable AI/ML for RAN Control.
While O-RAN provides the basic primitives to enable closed-
loop control, how to achieve this in an intelligent and efficient
way is an open challenge. The use cases discussed above rely
on a mix of heuristics and AI/ML-based solutions. As industry
transitions toward intelligent control, there is a need to identify
robust, reliable, and deployable ML solutions for wireless.
In [19], we discuss the AI/ML workflow that O-RAN systems
support, covering the end-to-end process, from data collection
to online inference and tuning. In this context, there are still
open questions related to (i) optimal methods for training with
offline data on systems which are fundamentally dynamic and
online, but also very sensitive to performance degradation; (ii)
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) solutions that generalize
well across deployments in different areas and with varying
traffic distributions, and how generative AI can be used in
the Open RAN context; and (iii) explainability solutions
for systems with dynamic control and complex input/output
relationships, among others.

Hierarchical Control. The possibilities led by two RICs
and the dApps, and their capability to extract data from the
network operations and to manage control decisions in the
RAN, position them ideally for stemming AI/ML use cases.
As mentioned above, AI/ML can optimize slicing decisions.
Furthermore, recent studies show traffic steering and beam-
forming can benefit from RICs [94, 118] and mutually improve
learning in the hierarchical structure of the RICs by the use
of a novel ML technique called Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning (HRL) [119]. Different timescales of RICs make it
challenging to have control-loops that use information from
multiple timescales. However, certain network optimizations
require fine and coarse granularity data at the same time.
HRL allows coordination of multiple timescales, yet, further
research is needed to enable information fusion and control in
a smoother way than it is today.

A. Implementation and Research Directions

A. Research Directions

Service Management and Orchestration Framework

O-RAN Interfaces
3GPP Interfaces

O2

Non-real-time RIC

A1

O1

E2
Term

E2
Term

O-CU-

E2

Near-real-

UP

F1-u

time RIC

E2

Open

E1

MT
O-DU
O-RU
O-DU

MT

O-DU

FH

Uu
Uu
O-CU-

O-eNB

F1-c

O1
Term
O1
Term

CP

O2
Term
O2
Term

IAB Donor
IAB Node

IAB Node

O-Cloud

Core Network
Internet
Fiber connectivity

Fig. 6: Proposed extension of the O-RAN architecture to managed self-backhaul scenarios based on IAB. Adapted from [130].

in how IAB systems are managed, through programmability,
softwarization, and disaggregation. The programmatic control
of RAN components via open interfaces and centralized con-
trol loops, as described in [19], holds significant potential
for optimizing and managing IAB. The authors of [130]
discuss how the existing O-RAN architecture can evolve to
accommodate IAB control, enabling data-driven control for
IAB. The proposed architecture is illustrated in Fig. 6. The
main component is the extension of O-RAN interfaces (e.g.,
E2, O1, and O2) to the wireless domain of the network,
through dedicated tunnels which allow the RICs and SMO
to reach the DU and MT in the IAB-Nodes.

IX. EMERGING SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS #2:
SELF-RECONFIGURABLE WIRELESS BACKHAULING

A. Research Directions

X. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we reviewed how the Open RAN paradigm
is a key enabler of innovations in 6G networks, considering a
system-level and architectural perspective. We have discussed
key requirements for 6G, including energy efficiency, cov-
erage, resiliency, cost and complexity, and innovation, and
explored how Open RAN design principles connect to such
6G requirements. For each principle, we have presented what
are the open challenges associated to its full development and
deployment in commercial networks.
This tutorial has highlighted how openness, virtualization,
programmability, softwarization, scaling, spectrum sharing,
self-backhaul, optimization, and automation are core compo-
nents of future 6G systems, and, in general, of how cellular
network need to be deployed going forward. There are still
several open challenges, primarily related to the design and
testing of intelligent algorithms that can fully take advantage
of such primitives to drive the network efficiency and perfor-
mance, which we believe need to be the focus of the wireless
networking research community as we head into 6G.

REFERENCES

Rittwik Jana is currently a Principal Wireless Net-
work Engineer at Google. Prior to this he worked at
VMWare as Chief architect of RAN Intelligence and
at AT&T Labs Research. His interests span archi-
tecting the disaggregated RAN intelligent controller
in O-RAN, service composition of VNFs using
TOSCA, model driven control loop and automation
in ONAP, video streaming for cellular networks and
systems. He is a recipient of the AT&T Science
and Technology medal in 2016 for contributions to
model driven cellular network planning, the IEEE
Jack Neubauer memorial award in 2017 for systems work on full duplex
wireless, and of several best paper awards in wireless communications. He
holds 100 granted patents and has published over 150 technical papers at
IEEE and ACM conferences and journals.