Is Self-knowledge and Action Consistent or Not:
Investigating Large Language Model’s Personality

Yiming Ai 1 Zhiwei He 1 Ziyin Zhang 1 Wenhong Zhu 1 Hongkun Hao 1 Kai Yu 2 Lingjun Chen 3 Rui Wang 1

Abstract

cognitive psychology, and psychometrics.
A common
method for assessment involves having LLMs answer per-
sonality questionnaires (Huang et al., 2024). However, the
reliability of LLMs’ responses, whether the responses truly
reflect LLMs’ genuine personality inclinations, and whether
LLMs’ behavior in real-world scenarios aligns with their
stated human-like personality tendencies remain unknown.

arXiv:2402.14679v2 [cs.CL] 10 Dec 2024

In this study, we delve into the validity of conven-
tional personality questionnaires in capturing the
human-like personality traits of Large Language
Models (LLMs). Our objective is to assess the
congruence between the personality traits LLMs
claim to possess and their demonstrated tenden-
cies in real-world scenarios. By conducting an
extensive examination of LLM outputs against
observed human response patterns, we aim to un-
derstand the disjunction between self-knowledge
and action in LLMs.

To illustrate such inconsistency in LLMs, we introduce two
concepts: self-knowledge 1 and action. In the following, self-
knowledge specifically refers to an individual’s understand-
ing and awareness of their own internal states, including
personality, emotions, values, motivations, and behavioral
patterns. The term personality knowledge mentioned later is
equivalent to self-knowledge. Action refers to the behavioral
state of an individual in actual situations. For humans, ac-
tion is the way self-knowledge is transformed into external
expression. Self-knowledge and action are meant to be two
interacting aspects.

1. Introduction

Personality, a foundational social, behavioral phenomenon
in psychology, encompasses the unique patterns of thoughts,
emotions, and behaviors of an entity (Allport, 1937; Roberts
& Yoon, 2022). In humans, personality is shaped by biologi-
cal and social factors, fundamentally influencing daily inter-
actions and preferences (Roberts et al., 2007). Studies have
indicated how personality information is richly encoded
within human language (Goldberg, 1981; Saucier & Gold-
berg, 2001). LLMs, containing extensive socio-political,
economic, and behavioral data, can generate language that
expresses personality content. Measuring and verifying the
ability of LLMs to synthesize personality brings hope for
the safety, responsibility, and coordination of LLM efforts
(Gabriel, 2020) and sheds light on enhancing LLM perfor-
mance in specific tasks through targeted adjustments.

From the perspective of LLMs, a discordance between an
LLM’s asserted self-knowledge and its action can result in
noteworthy adverse outcomes. For example, while an LLM
may claim to prioritize human friendliness, its failure to
manifest amicable behaviors in real-world situations is un-
doubtedly a circumstance we fervently seek to avert. Hence,
our study endeavors to assess the alignment between the
personality traits claimed by LLMs and their actual behav-
ior tendency. From the perspective of personality scales,
there have been several studies investigating the reliability
of personality questionnaires on LLMs (Huang et al., 2023;
Safdari et al., 2023). However, there has yet to be any explo-
ration of the validity of psychological scales on LLMs. Our
work aims to address this gap in the research literature. In
general, our research makes three significant contributions:

Thus, evaluating the anthropomorphic personality perfor-
mance of LLMs has become a shared interest across fields
such as artificial intelligence(AI) studies, social sciences,

1MT Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2X-LANCE Lab,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China 3School of Education, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Rui
Wang

• We design a behavior tendency questionnaire that re-
flects real-world situations and behaviors based on
them;

• We evaluate the self-knowledge-action congruence of
LLMs, revealing substantial disparities between LLMs’

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
self-knowledge/

the individual’s actual response in a real-life situation, in
that this represents the most direct approach to behavioral
sampling. We recruited 16 individuals, each representing
a distinct MBTI type, to undertake the following task: for
every statement in the personality knowledge questionnaire,
they provided a practical scenario case. Each scenario case
comprises situations drawn from their own lives, along with
two completely contrasting actions: Action A and Action
B. Action A fully aligns with the statement, while Action
B completely contradicts it. The content of Action A and
Action B need to be kept basically the same length.

personality knowledge and behavioral inclinations;

• We empirically test various LLMs against observed
human response patterns and formulate conjectures,
thereby shedding light on the potential and limitations
of LLMs in mimicking complex human psychological
traits.

In Section 2, we introduce the process of our corpus design.
Section 3 presents the our empirical analysis – evaluating
self-knowledge-action congruence of various LLMs. Fi-
nally, in Section 4, we conclude our work.

Step 2: Following the acquisition of the 16 practical sce-
nario cases corresponding to each statement, we condensed
them into a single case. For 19 statements exhibiting signifi-
cant variations in cases, we amalgamated them into 2 to 3
cases.

2. Corpus Design

In the nuanced exploration of anthropomorphic personal-
ity traits within LLMs, selecting the most appropriate per-
sonality tests is paramount. Among diverse personality
assessments, the comprehensive coverage of personality
dimensions, theoretical robustness, and practical relevance
make the Big Five Personality Traits (Goldberg, 1981; Costa
& McCrae, 2008) and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
(MBTI) (Myers, 1962) the most fitting choices for our study.

Step 3: For statements associated with multiple practical
scenario cases, we tasked the previously enlisted 16 individ-
uals to assign ratings to each case. A rating of 1 was given
if they believed the case accurately reflected the meaning
of the corresponding statement in the personality knowl-
edge questionnaire; otherwise, a rating of 0 was assigned.
The case with the highest score for these 19 statements was
selected as the final practical scenario case.

To devise a straightforward yet impactful evaluation of
LLMs’ personality traits, we’ve opted for two question-
naires (TDA-100 (Goldberg, 1992) and BFI-44 (John et al.,
1991)) rooted in the Big Five model, along with one ques-
tionnaire (16 Personalities 2) based on the MBTI model.
These selections were made due to their proven high relia-
bility and validity in both English and Chinese (Goldberg,
1992; John et al., 1991; Makwana & Dave, 2020; Zhang,

Step 4: We enlisted the participation of 10 reviewers to
assess the consistency of the 180 personality knowledge -
practical scenario pairs. The results demonstrate that the
consistency approval rate for each pair exceeds 90%.

All the individuals involved are native Chinese speakers with
a level of English proficiency of CEFR C1. The detailed
instructions for the scenario providers and reviewers are
shown in Appendix G. Several examples of a personality
knowledge - practical scenario pair are shown in Appendix
D.

2012). Based on these questionnaires, we ensure that our
investigation into the anthropomorphic traits of LLMs is
grounded in robust psychological methodology and thereby
construct a bilingual personality knowledge questionnaire,
including a total of 180 statements.

The culmination of this meticulous process is a bilingual
English-Chinese Parallel Sentence Pair Self-knowledge-
Action Test Set, comprising 180 matched pairs of personal-
ity knowledge and action scenarios. This corpus serves as
a fundamental tool in our study, allowing us to rigorously
evaluate the LLMs’ proficiency in understanding and acting
upon various personality traits, bridging the gap between
personality understanding and practical action in the realm
of AI.

In the following, we will detail the methodology adopted to
create a comprehensive corpus aimed at evaluating the con-
gruence between the personality traits professed by LLMs
and their behavior tendency. The corpus is comprised of 2
parts: a personality knowledge questionnaire and a behavior
tendency questionnaire. The former includes 180 statements
mentioned before, and the latter is closely aligned with the
former.

We apply the common method of constructing behavioral
procedures approach test, sample approach, which assumes
that the test behavior constitutes a subset of the actual be-
haviors of interest (Golfried & Kent, 1972). The detailed
design process is outlined as follows:

3. Experiment on LLMs’
Self-knowledge-Action Congruence

3.1. Experiment

Step 1: As Golfried & Kent (1972) has mentioned that
the ideal approach to response expression would constitute

Among all LLMs, we selected baize-v2-7b, ChatGLM3,
GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4, internLM-chat-7b, Mistral-7b, MPT-
7b-chat, Qwen-14b-chat, TULU-2-DPO-7b, Vicuna-13b,

2

Vicuna-33b and Zephyr-7b, 12 LLMs in total, who could
answer the personality cognitive questionnaire in the form
of a Q&A. The detailed setup is shown in Appendix D. Then,
we rewrote a prompt for LLM to answer the former part
of our corpus - personality knowledge questionnaire based
on the response requirements of the MBTI-M questionnaire
(GU & Hu, 2012) in Appendix D.

Concerning the prompt for LLM to answer the latter part
of our corpus-behavior tendency questionnaire, we inherit
the instruction of the MBTI-M questionnaire (GU & Hu,
2012) and rewrite it, for we intend to change the responding
approach.

We apply a 7-point graded forced-choice format (Brown &
Maydeu-Olivares, 2018) as the responding approach. Cur-
rently, the commonly used response formats for question-
naires in psychometrics are the forced-choice format (Sis-
son, 1948) and the Likert scale format (Joshi et al., 2015).
In comparison to traditional forced-choice scales, graded
forced-choice scales exhibit comparable validity, superior
reliability and model fit. Contrary to Likert scales, graded
forced-choice scales show better model fit and slightly
higher self-other agreement (Zhang et al., 2023). The spe-
cific meaning of numbers in common 7-point graded forced-
choice is shown in Appendix E.

Upon reviewing the responses from the LLMs, we discov-
ered that some LLMs failed to grasp the intended mean-
ing of the prompts, resulting in unreasonable responses as
detailed in Appendix A. Out of the LLMs assessed, only
seven LLMs, ChatGLM3, GPT-4, GPT-3.5-turbo, Mistral-
7b, Vicuna-13b, Vicuna-33b, and Zephyr7b, produced valid
responses. Subsequently, we sifted through these valid re-
sponses, computed their averages to represent the LLMs’
actual responses, and proceeded to evaluate the reliability
of these responses, as outlined in Appendix B. Following
this assessment, we determined that the responses from
ChatGLM3, GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT4, Vicuna13b and Vi-
cuna33b are reliable for further personality analysis.

Here, given that we have rewritten the prompt of responding
to personality knowledge questionnaire based on the original
instructions of the chosen personality scales, thereby not
indicating the specific meaning of numbers 2, 3, 5 and 6. We
followed this prompt pattern to avoid influence on LLMs’
responses brought by such change, which means only retain
the meaning of numbers 1, 4 and 7. Hence, the specific
prompt is: Read the following scenarios with actions A and
B carefully and rate each scenario in the range from 1 to
7. 1 means that action A applies to you completely in this
scenario, 4 means that action A and action B equally apply
(or not) to you in this scenario, and 7 means that action B
applies to you completely in this scenario. You only need to
give the number.

In the following, we explore the alignment between re-
sponses given by LLMs to personality knowledge question-
naires and their actions within designed scenarios. Regard-
ing the prompt for questioning, we selected the instructions
of five common academic questionnaires with effective anal-
ysis of reliability and validity (Makwana & Dave, 2020;
Johnson et al., 1998; Goldberg, 1992; John et al., 1991;
Nardi, 2011), 16 Personalities Test, MBTI-M, TDA-100,
BFI-44-Children adapted and Dario Nardi’s Cognitive Test,
as the prompt for the LLM of questioning of the personal-
ity knowledge questionnaire. We utilize various prompts
to prevent any particular prompt from exerting a specific
influence on LLM responses, thereby accurately reflecting
the general tendencies of LLMs when answering personality
knowledge questionnaires.

These measures above allow us to to observe the congruence
between self-knowledge and action of LLMs, to compare
human and LLM responses.

As for the responding approach to the personality knowl-
edge questionnaire, according to the structure of the chosen
personality scales in 2, responses to statements are initially
mapped on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 to 7. Ac-
cording to several previous studies, when responding to
personality scales, LLMs’ answers often remain consistent,
regardless of factors such as question order, quantity, an-
swer sequence, or timing of inquiry. (Huang et al., 2023;
Safdari et al., 2023). Therefore, for each prompt, we asked
each LLM 10 times with the original form of our chosen
personality scales and then screened the valid responses.
We averaged all the valid responses to reduce errors and
reflect the general LLMs’ response pattern. and rounded
the average response to each statement to the nearest whole
number as each LLM’s response to the personality knowl-
edge questionnaire. The details of the prompts are shown in
Appendix D.

3.2. Results

To quantify the similarity between responses, we employ
the following four metrics: cosine similarity, Spearman’s
rank correlation coefficient, value mean difference (VMD)
and Proportion of Consistent Pairs.

Cosine Similarity
A measure used to calculate the cosine
of the angle between two vectors in a multi-dimensional
space, offering a value range from -1 (exactly opposite) to
1 (exactly the same), where higher values indicate greater
similarity.

Pn
i=1 (xi × yi)
qPn
i=1 (xi)2 ×
qPn
i=1 (yi)2 ,
(1)

scos =

where xi are LLMs’ responses of personality knowledge
questionnaire, yi are LLMs’ corresponding responses of
scenario and action questionnaire, and xi and yi correspond

Table 1. LLMs’ Self-knowledge - Action Congruence Performance with Reference of Human Respondents’ Performance (AVG, SD,
MIN and MAX represents the average number, standard deviation, minimum and maximum.)

LLMs & Human
Respondents
Cosine
Similarity
Spearman Rank
Correlation Coefficient
Value Mean
Difference
Proportion of
Consistent Pairs

ChatGLM3
0.24
0.23
1.58
47.22%
GPT-3.5-turbo
0.17
0.19
1.74
50.56%
GPT-4
0.52
0.56
1.02
78.89%
Vicuna-13b
0.08
0.07
1.57
52.78%
Vicuna-33b
0.18
0.06
1.68
52.22%
LLMs(AVG ± SD)
0.24 ± 0.15
0.22 ± 0.18
1.52 ± 0.26
56.78 ± 11.25%

Human(AVG ± SD)
0.76 ± 0.09
0.78 ± 0.08
0.69 ± 0.27
84.69 ± 8.22%
Human(MIN)
0.61
0.66
1.08
73.78%
Human(MAX)
0.95
0.96
0.07
99.44%

English proficiency level of CEFR C1. As shown in Table
1, the analysis of their response data yielded an average
Cosine Similarity and Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coeffi-
cient above 0.75, with a Value Mean Difference around 0.68,
and a Proportion of Consistent Pairs exceeding 84%. These
results indicate a high degree of similarity and strong corre-
lation between responses to the two types of questionnaires,
suggesting a basic consistency in human self-knowledge and
an ability to align self-knowledge with action in real-life
scenarios.

to each other one-to-one.

Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient
A non-
parametric measure of rank correlation, assessing how well
the relationship between two variables can be described
using a monotonic function. Its value ranges from -1 to
1, where 1 means a perfect association of ranks. Specifi-
cally, we rank the responses on two questionnaires of the
LLMs based on their numerical values separately. Then,
we calculate the difference in rankings for each personality
knowledge – scenario & action pair. Afterwards, we use the
following formula to calculate the coefficient rs.

The same questionnaires were administered to the 5 LLMs
selected in Section B, and their responses were analyzed
using the aforementioned metrics. Compared to human
respondents, the similarity in LLMs’ responses is notably
lower, and the corresponding significance test is shown in
Appendix F. Specifically, the average Cosine Similarity and
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient for LLMs are sub-
stantially below those of human respondents, with a huge
difference exceeding 0.42. The Value Mean Difference for
LLMs averages around 1.52, indicating a substantial diver-
gence in self-knowledge between the two types of question-
naires for LLMs. And as for most LLMs, the proportion
of consistent pairs falls below 55%, raising questions about
LLMs’ ability to achieve self-knowledge-action unity in
practice.

rs = 1 −
6 P d2
i
n(n2 −1),
(2)

where di is the difference in rankings of each pair and n is
the total count of pairs.

Value Mean Difference (VMD)
Value Mean Difference
is the average difference in responses across all paired items
in the questionnaires, as shown in the formula below.

VMD =
P di

n
,
(3)

where di is the difference of responses in each pair.

Proportion of Consistent Pairs
Recognizing that minor
discrepancies are natural when comparing psychological
tendencies with actual actions, this metric quantifies the
proportion of item pairs with a response difference of 1 or
less, focusing on the consistency of tendencies rather than
exact matches.
Pc = Nc

4. Conclusion

We demonstrate that while LLMs exhibit some capacity to
mimic human-like tendencies, there are significant gaps in
the coherence between their stated personality and exhibited
behaviors. This disparity probably suggests a limitation in
LLMs’ ability to authentically replicate human personality
dynamics. Our study underscores the importance of further
exploration into enhancing LLMs’ ability to perform more
genuinely human-like interactions, suggesting avenues for
future research in improving the psychological realism of

Nt
,
(4)

where Nc is the number of consistent pairs, Nt is the total
number of pairs.

For this study, we recruited 16 participants, comprising 8
males and 8 females, all native Chinese speakers with an

10.1080/10705511.2017.1392247.

LLM outputs.

Limitations

Costa, P. T. and McCrae, R. R. The revised neo personality
inventory (neo-pi-r). The SAGE handbook of personality
theory and assessment, 2(2):179–198, 2008.

In this study, we delve into the alignment between what
Large Language Models (LLMs) claim and their actions,
aiming to discern if there’s a consistency in their self-
knowledge and their actual behavior tendency. This ob-
servation is merely one among several hypotheses exploring
the root causes of this inconsistency, underscoring the need
for further investigation into the fundamental reasons be-
hind it. Moreover, the scope of our initial experiments was
limited to a selection of several LLMs. Future endeavors
will expand this investigation to encompass a broader array
of models. Additionally, our study has yet to identify an
effective strategy for enhancing the congruence between
LLMs’ self-knowledge and action. As we move forward,
our efforts will focus on leveraging the insights gained from
this research to improve the performance and reliability
of LLMs, paving the way for models that more accurately
mirror human thought and behavior.

Gabriel, I.
Artificial intelligence, values, and align-
ment.
Minds and machines, 30(3):411–437, 2020.
URL
10.1007/s11023-020-09539-2.

Goldberg,
L. R.
Language and individual differ-
ences:
The search for universals in personality
lexicons.
Review of personality and social psy-
chology,
2(1):141–165,
1981.
URL

//
3cdca9a2-ab50-48bf-97b5-0c2236e65098.

Goldberg, L. R.
The development of markers for the
big-five factor structure. Psychological assessment, 4
(1):26, 1992. URL
record/1992-25730-001.

Golfried, M. R. and Kent, R. N. Traditional versus behav-
ioral personality assessment: A comparison of method-
ological and theoretical assumptions.
Psychological
Bulletin, 77(6):409, 1972. URL
apa.org/record/1972-29191-001.

Impact Statement

Our personality knowledge survey leverages the TDA-100,
BFI-44, and the 16 Personalities Test, which are extensively
recognized and employed within the personality knowledge
domain. These tests, available in both Chinese and English,
are backed by thorough reliability and validity analyses. We
ensured the integrity of these instruments by maintaining
their original content without any modifications. The de-
sign of every questionnaire intentionally avoids any bias
related to gender and is free from racial content, fostering
an inclusive approach. Participants’ anonymity was strictly
preserved during the survey process. Moreover, all indi-
viduals were fully informed about the purpose of the study
and consented to their responses being utilized for scientific
research, thereby arising no ethical issues.

GU,
X.-Y.
and
Hu,
S.
Mbti:
New
develop-
ment
and
application.
Advances
in
Psycho-
logical
Science,
20(10):1700,
2012.
URL

EN/10.3724/SP.J.1042.2012.01700.

Huang, J., Wang, W., Lam, M. H., Li, E. J., Jiao, W., and
Lyu, M. R. Revisiting the reliability of psychological
scales on large language models, 2023. URL
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.19926v3.

Huang, J., Wang, W., Li, E. J., Lam, M. H., Ren, S., Yuan,
Y., Jiao, W., Tu, Z., and Lyu, M. R. Who is chatgpt?
benchmarking llms’ psychological portrayal using psy-
chobench, 2024. URL
2310.01386.

Acknowledgement

This paper is partially supported by SMP-Zhipu.AI Large
Model Cross-Disciplinary Fund.

John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., and Kentle, R. L.
Big
five inventory. Journal of personality and social psy-
chology, 1991. URL
doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Ft07550-000.

References

Allport, G. W. Personality: A psychological interpreta-
tion.
1937.
URL
record/1938-01964-000.

Johnson, W. L., Johnson, A. M., Murphy, S. D., Weiss,
A., and Zimmerman, K. J. A third-order component
analysis of the myers-briggs type indicator.
Educa-
tional and psychological measurement, 58(5):820–831,
1998. URL
doi/abs/10.1177/0013164498058005007.

Brown, A. and Maydeu-Olivares, A.
Ordinal fac-
tor
analysis
of
graded-preference
questionnaire
data.
Structural Equation Modeling:
A Multidis-
ciplinary Journal,
25(4):516–529,
2018.
URL

Sisson, E. D. Forced choice—the new army rating 1. Per-
sonnel Psychology, 1(3):365–381, 1948. URL
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/j.1744-6570.1948.tb01316.x.

Joshi, A., Kale, S., Chandel, S., and Pal, D. K.
Lik-
ert scale:
Explored and explained.
British jour-
nal of applied science & technology, 7(4):396–403,
2015. URL
net/id/eprint/2464/.

Zhang, B., Luo, J., and Li, J.
Moving beyond lik-
ert and traditional forced-choice scales:
A compre-
hensive investigation of the graded forced-choice for-
mat.
Multivariate Behavioral Research, pp. 1–27,
2023.
URL
doi/abs/10.1080/00273171.2023.2235682.

Makwana, K. and Dave, D. G. B. Confirmatory factor anal-
ysis of neris type explorer® scale–a tool for personality
assessment. International Journal of Management, 11(9),
2020. URL
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3709640.

Zhang, X. Preliminary revision of the Big Five Personal-
ity Inventory (IPIP NEO-PI-R). PhD thesis, Yangzhou
University, 2012.

Miotto, M., Rossberg, N., and Kleinberg, B. Who is GPT-
3? an exploration of personality, values and demograph-
ics. In Bamman, D., Hovy, D., Jurgens, D., Keith, K.,
O’Connor, B., and Volkova, S. (eds.), Proceedings of
the Fifth Workshop on Natural Language Processing
and Computational Social Science (NLP+CSS), pp. 218–
227, Abu Dhabi, UAE, November 2022. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
nlpcss-1.24. URL
2022.nlpcss-1.24.

Myers, I. B. The myers-briggs type indicator: Manual
(1962). 1962. URL
record/2013-29682-000?doi=1.

Nardi, D. Neuroscience of personality. Neuroscience, 2:
10–2012, 2011. URL
aaa287819128.pdf.

Roberts,
B.
W.
and
Yoon,
H.
J.
Personality
psychology.
Annual
review
of
psychology,
73:489–516,
2022.
URL

annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/
annurev-psych-020821-114927.

Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R., Caspi,
A.,
and Goldberg,
L. R.
The power of per-
sonality:
The comparative validity of personality
traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability
for predicting important life outcomes.
Perspec-
tives on Psychological science, 2(4):313–345, 2007.
URL
abs/10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00047.x.

Safdari, M., Serapio-Garc´ıa, G., Crepy, C., Fitz, S., Romero,
P., Sun, L., Abdulhai, M., Faust, A., and Matari´c,
M. Personality traits in large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.00184, 2023.
URL
arxiv.org/abs/2307.00184.

Saucier, G. and Goldberg, L. R.
Lexical studies of in-
digenous personality factors: Premises, products, and
prospects. Journal of personality, 69(6):847–879, 2001.

A. LLMs’ Unreasonable Responses

The unreasonable responses mainly fall into the following five categories:

• All responses are the same number;

• All responses are greater than or equal to 4 or less than or equal to 4. (Due to the presence of both positive and negative
descriptions for the same assessment dimension (e.g., Openness) in our personality knowledge questionnaire, it is
impossible for a participant to answer with all responses greater than or equal to 4, indicating agreement or neutrality
for all statements, or all responses less than or equal to 4, indicating disagreement or neutrality for all statements.);

• Responses fall outside the numerical range of 1 to 7;

• Unable to score: responses similar to the following text: ”I’m sorry, but as an AI language model, I cannot provide a
response to your prompt as it is not clear what you are asking for. Please provide more context or clarify your question
for me to provide an accurate response.”

• Responses are non-score-related content, such as merely repeating statements from the questionnaire.

B. Reliability of LLMs’ Responses

In evaluating the anthropomorphic personality traits demonstrated by LLMs through human personality assessments, the
reliability and validity of LLMs’ responses to such questionnaires merit further scientific scrutiny. The study by Miotto
et al. (2022) highlighted the necessity for a more formal psychometric evaluation and construct validity assessment when
interpreting questionnaire-based measurements of LLMs’ potential psychological characteristics. To address these concerns,
we employed two distinct methods to examine the reliability of LLMs’ responses systematically: Logical Consistency and
Split-Half Reliability. These methods provide a structured approach to evaluating the consistency and reliability of responses,
which is crucial for ensuring the robustness of our findings. Out of three selected personality scales, we chose TDA-100 (80
statements) for reliability testing. Each statement of TDA-100 has explicitly stated the specific assessment dimension and
scoring direction (forward scoring or reverse scoring) (Goldberg, 1992), both of which are critical to our assessment of the
reliability of LLM responses using the two subsequent methods. As for the basis model of TDA-100, the Big Five model,
there are 5 assessment dimensions in total: neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness and conscientiousness.

The TDA-100 response format employs a 7-point Likert scale, with a scoring range of 1 to 7 for each statement. From 1 to
7, 1 indicates that the respondent believes the statement does not apply to them at all, and 7 indicates that the statement
completely applies to them. Each assessment dimension consists of several statements, some of which are positive and
others negative. Specifically, within a selected assessment dimension, the closer a respondent’s score is to 7 for positive
statements, the more they exhibit characteristics of that dimension. Conversely, the closer their score is to 7 for negative
statements, the less they exhibit characteristics of that dimension. For example, consider two statements for the Extraversion
dimension as shown below. Statement 1 is positive, while Statement 2 is negative.

Statement 1: Finish what I start.

Statement 2: Leave things unfinished.

A higher score for Statement 1 indicates greater extraversion, while a higher score for Statement 2 indicates greater
introversion. Therefore, within each dimension, positive statements are scored forwardly, and negative statements are scored
reversely (7 minus the original score). Thus, when calculating a respondent’s score for any given dimension, the total score
comprises the original scores for all positive statements plus (7 minus the original score) for all negative statements.

The first method, Logical Consistency, is employed to ensure that the LLMs’ responses across the questionnaire are coherent
and consistent. By integrating reverse-scored items, we are able to check whether the LLMs carefully read and seriously
respond to the questions. And the distribution of forward and reverse scored items within each assessment orientation is
shown in Table 2.

After collecting the data, we adjusted the answers of negative(reverse-scored) items to align them with the overall scoring
direction of the questionnaire. In this way, if LLMs’ responses to positive and adjusted negative items are statistically
consistent, they will show a similar pattern or trend, as evidenced by a 7-point Likert scale in which all answers are greater

Table 2. Distribution of Forward and Reverse Scored Items

Orientation
Forward
Reverse
NEUROTICISM
9
5
EXTRAVERSION
10
10
OPENNESS
9
5
AGREEABLENESS
10
9
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS
6
7
TOTAL COUNT
44
36

than or equal to 4, or less than or equal to 4, which indicate that the LLMs have responded conscientiously and logically. We
introduce the Consistency metric to measure the logical consistency of LLM responses with the following formula:

Nc
Nt −Pmin
Pmax −Pmin
,
(5)

Consistency =

where Nc is the number of questions with the same response direction within each measurement tendency in the adjusted
response, Nt is the number of all statements, Pmax and Pmin are the maximum and the minimum of the proportion of
consistent responses in all the statements. The value of Pmax is 1, representing that all the responses are internally consistent

P⌈Ni

2 ⌉
Nt
, where Nt is the count of all of the scored
statements and Ni is the count of scored statements in each assessment orientation. Hence, Pmin equals to 0.5125. The
range of Consistency is from 0 to 1. The closer the value of Consistency is to 1, the more internally consistent the LLM’s
responses are. Consequently, we can evaluate the LLM’s responses based on the prior knowledge of human personality
assessment questionnaires

within each assessment orientation. The value of Pmin is supposed to be

The second method is Split-Half Reliability. We measure the reliability of LLM’s responses by comparing two equal-length
sections of the questionnaire. This approach is based on the assumption that if a test is reliable, then any two equal-length
sections of it should produce similar results. We first divide the questionnaire into two equal-length sections while ensuring
that the content of each section is basically the same, representing that the numbers of statements within any assessment
dimension in two halves are the same, thereby ensuring the accuracy of the reliability assessment. Then, we compute the
Spearman’s rank coefficient between the scores of the two sections to measure their consistency. The specific formula
is shown in Section 3.2. Larger values indicate higher internal consistency of the responses. Finally, we calculated the
reliability of the overall responses by using the Spearman-Brown formula as follows:

Reliability =
2corr
1 + corr,
(6)

where corr is the Spearman’s rank coefficient between the scores of the two sections. The range of Reliability is from
negative infinity to 1. Only if the value of an LLM’s responses Reliability metric is around the human level, we can make it
for further investigation.

We assessed the reliability of seven LLMs’ reponses. The results of the are shown in Table 3.

We have also recruited 16 human participants, comprising an equal number of males and females, all native Chinese speakers
with an English proficiency level of C1 according to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR),
representing that they can express themselves effectively and flexibly in English in social, academic and work situations.
The average value (with standard deviation) of their Consistency and Reliability is 0.73 ± 0.13 and 0.69 ± 0.09. And
the minimum value is 0.49 and 0.57. Therefore, we regard ChatGLM3, GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT4, Vicuna13b and Vicuna33b
as LLMs demonstrating high coherence in logical consistency, as well as high consistency in the split-half reliability test,
which indicates that they respond to the personality questionnaires like how humans would. Hence, their responses are
deemed sufficiently reliable to be used for further personality analysis. This rigorous methodological approach provides a
solid foundation for our exploration into the potential of LLMs to simulate human personality traits.

C. Several Examples of Our Corpus

Our corpus consists of 2 parts: one part is personality knowledge questionnaire, including 180 statements; the other part is
behavior tendency questionnaire, including 180 practical scenario cases corresponding to the statements before. Here are

Table 3. Results of Verification on LLMs’ and Human Respondents’ Responses of Personality Cognition Questionnaire based on
Consistency and Reliability Metrics

LLM
Consistency
Reliability
ChatGLM3
0.82
0.69
GPT-3.5-turbo
0.97
0.88
GPT-4
1
0.90
Mistral-7b
0.46
0.66
Vicuna-13b
0.79
0.72
Vicuna-33b
0.64
0.61
Zephyr-7b
0.28
0.64
Selected LLMs
0.85 ± 0.13
0.69 ± 0.11
Human(AVG)
0.73 ± 0.13
0.69 ± 0.09
Human(MIN)
0.49
0.57
Human(MAX)
1
0.83

several examples of our corpus shown in Table 5.

Table 4. LLMs’ Resources for Cognition-Action Congruence and Corresponding Hypothesis Experiments

Model
URL or version
Licence

GPT-3.5-turbo
gpt-3.5-turbo-0613
-
GPT-4
gpt-4-0314
-
baize-v2-7b

cc-by-nc-4.0
internLM-chat-7b

Apache-2.0
Mistral-7b

Apache-2.0
MPT-7b-chat

cc-by-nc-sa-4.0
TULU2-DPO-7b

AI2 ImpACT Low-risk license
Vicuna-13b

llama2
Vicuna-33b

Non-commercial license
Zephyr-7b

Mit
Qwen-14b-Chat

Tongyi Qianwen
ChatGLM3-6b

The ChatGLM3-6B License

D. Experiment Setup

The details of the experimental setup are shown in Table 6.

The details of the experimental setup are shown in Table 4.

E. Meaning of numbers in 7-point graded forced-choice

The specific meaning of numbers in common 7-point graded forced-choice is shown as follows:

1. Action A applies to you completely in this scenario.

2. Action A applies to you much more than action B in this scenario.

3. Action A applies to you slightly more than action B in this scenario.

4. Action A and action B equally apply (or not) to you in this scenario.

5. Action B applies to you much more than action A in this scenario.

6. Action B applies to you slightly more than action A in this scenario.

7. Action B applies to you completely in this scenario.

Table 5. Several Examples of the Corpus

Personality Knowledge Statements
Practical Scenario Cases
EN: You waste your time.
In everyday life:
A. you always use your time productively.
B. you always spend time on meaningless activities.
ZH: 你浪费自己的时间。
在日常生活中：
A. 你总是有效地利用时间。
B. 你总是在无意义的活动上花费时间。
EN: You complete tasks successfully.
When assigned a challenging project with a tight deadline:
A. you are overwhelmed and have difficulty moving the process forward effec-
tively, often resulting in incomplete or unsatisfactory results.
B. you organise your work and manage your resources properly, and the project
is often completed successfully and on time.
ZH: 你能成功完成任务。
当被指派一个期限紧迫的具有挑战性的项目时：
A. 你不知所措，难以有效地推进进程，常导致结果不完整或不令人满
意。
B. 你组织工作，妥善管理资源，项目往往按时顺利完成。
EN: You shirk your duties.
When someone points out a mistake in your work:
A. you take responsibility.
B. you shirk your responsibility.
ZH: 你推卸责任。
当别人指出你的工作失误：
A. 你勇于承担责任。
B. 你推卸责任。
EN: You tend to find fault with others.
When dealing with people:
A. you tend to focus on the person’s good points and strengths.
B. you often pick on other people’s faults and weaknesses.
ZH: 你喜欢挑剔别人的毛病。
在与人相处时：
A. 你往往关注他的优点与长处。
B. 你常挑剔别人的缺点与毛病。
EN: You usually postpone finalizing
When making choices:
decisions for as long as possible.
A. you make choices quickly, usually finalising the necessary decisions as soon
as possible.
B. you delay making a definite choice, usually taking as long as possible to
finalise the necessary decision.
ZH: 你通常会尽可能推迟最终决定。
在做选择时：
A. 你会迅速做出选择，通常会尽快敲定必要的决定。
B. 你会推迟做出明确的选择，通常会尽可能长时间地敲定必要的决定。
EN: You struggle with deadlines.
You have a week to complete a work project:
A. you always make sure that it is completed ahead of or on the deadline.
B. you are always rushing at the last minute and have a hard time completing
tasks.
ZH: 你很难在最后期限前完成任务。
你有一周的时间来完成一个工作项目：
A. 你往往确保提前或在截止日期完成。
B. 你总是在最后一刻还在赶工，很难完成任务。
EN: You remain calm in tense situations.
When dealing with a conflict or a high-pressure problem:
A. you become visibly agitated, finding it challenging to maintain composure.
B. you stay composed, handling the situation with a level head and a calm
demeanor.
ZH: 你在紧张情境中仍保持冷静。
在处理冲突或高压问题时：
A. 你会明显变得焦躁不安，发现保持镇定很有挑战性。
B. 你保持镇定，以平和的心态和冷静的举止处理情况。
EN: You are the life of the party.
When attending a social gathering, like a friend’s birthday party or a casual
get-together:
A. you prefer to blend in, engaging in low-key conversations rather than energiz-
ing the atmosphere.
B. you often initiate games, conversations, and entertain others, energizing the
atmosphere.
ZH: 聚会时你是活跃气氛的人。
参加社交聚会，如朋友的生日派对或休闲聚会时：
A. 你喜欢融入其中，低调地交谈，而不是主动活跃气氛。
B. 你经常会主动发起游戏、谈话，活跃气氛。

Table 6. Various Prompts of Personality Knowledge Questionnaire

Source
Prompt
16
Personalities
Test

You can only reply to me with numbers from 1 to 7. Score each statement on a scale of 1 to 7 with 1 being
disagree, 4 being not sure and 7 being agree.
MBTI-M Test
Read the following statements carefully and rate each one from 1 to 7, with 7 meaning that it applies to you
completely, 1 meaning that it doesn’t apply to you at all, and 4 meaning that you are not sure whether it
applies to you or not.
TDA-100 Test
Below are several descriptions that may or may not fit you. Please indicate how much you agree or disagree
with that statement by giving a specific number from 1 to 7. 1 means you totally disagree with the statement,
4 means you are not sure, and 7 means you totally agree with the statement.
BFI-44-children
adapted version

Here are several statements that may or may not describe what you are like. Write the number between 1 and
7 that shows how much you agree or disagree that it describes you. 1 means you disagree strongly that the
statement applies to you, 4 means you are not sure, and 7 means you agree strongly with the statement.
Dario
Nardi’s
Cognitive Test

Please read carefully each of the phrases below. For each phrase: Rate how often you do skillfully what the
phrase describes between 1 and 7. 1 means the phrase is not me, 4 means that you are not sure, and 7 means
that the phrase is exactly me.

F. Significance Tests

In the following, we will apply significance tests to further demonstrate significant differences between the performance of
LLMs and humans. We incorporated significance testing for the responses of LLMs and humans in the same experiment.
Specifically, we performed permutation tests to compare LLMs’ results and human respondents’ results, yielding p-values
significantly below 0.05 in experiments in Section 3.2 (corresponding to results in Table 1). This confirms substantial
disparities between LLMs and humans in performance for each metric across both experiments. The specific p-values are
outlined in Table 7.

Table 7. Results of significance testing for the responses of LLMs and humans in the experiment in Section 3.2

P-value of COMPARISON
between LLMs & Human
Cosine
Similarity
Spearman Rank
Correlation Coefficient
Value Mean
Difference
Proportion of
Consistent Pairs

Results in Table 1
4.91e-05
4.91e-05
1.47e-04
2.46e-05

G. Additional Notes On Human Reviewers and Respondents

G.1. Recruitment of Scenario Providers, Reviewers and Human Respondents

We recruited individuals from undergraduate, postgraduate and PhD students. Taking the International English Language
Testing System(IELTS), CET 6 exam results, and their GPA in English courses into account, we recruited 16, 10 and 35
native Chinese speakers as reviewers and respondents.

G.2. Instructions Given to Scenario Providers

Before requiring the individual to complete the following tasks, we asked the respondents whether they agreed to the
anonymisation of their reviews for scientific research and subsequent publication. Only if the respondents gave their consent
were they given the corpus to review. And we promised not to publish each individual’s MBTI results and specific practical
scenario cases. Then, we investigated each person’s MBTI type and ensured that we ultimately recruited 16 individuals with
distinct MBTI types. After this, we required the reviewers to accomplish the following tasks：

Please provide a practical scenario case for every statement in the personality knowledge questionnaire. Each scenario case
comprises situations drawn from your own lives, along with two completely contrasting actions: Action A and Action B.
Action A fully aligns with the statement, while Action B completely contradicts it. The content of Action A and Action B
need to be kept basically the same length.

G.3. Instructions Given to Reviewers

We require the reviewers to accomplish the following tasks：

• Please determine whether the practical scenario case is consistent with its corresponding personality knowledge
statement. If yes, rate 1. If not, rate 0.

• If you rate 0 for all of the practical scenario cases of a personality knowledge statement, please offer suggestions to
improve the practical scenario design. It would be better if an example could be provided.

G.4. Instructions Given to Respondents

Before answering the questionnaires, we did not tell the respondents what kind of questionnaires they would be answering
or how the questions were related to each other. In addition to this, we asked the respondents whether they agreed to the
anonymisation of their answers for scientific research and subsequent publication. Only if the respondents gave their consent
were they given the questionnaires to answer.

In all experiments that appeared in our research, human respondents received the exact same prompts that LLM received.
The difference is that in the case of experiments with multiple prompts with similar meanings, LLM responded multiple
times by prompt type, while human subjects read all the prompts and responded only once.