Mitigating Misleading Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
with Selective Filtering

Yexin Wu1, Zhuosheng Zhang2,∗, Hai Zhao3,4,∗

1College of Zhiyuan, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wuyexin_libro_i131,

Abstract
Large language models have manifested remarkable capabilities by leveraging chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning
techniques to solve intricate questions through step-by-step reasoning chains. Despite its success, the efficacy of such
reasoning is inherently contingent upon the quality of CoT. However, flawless CoT reasoning cannot be guaranteed
due to the presence of indecomposable questions and the potential for erroneous reasoning chains, particularly in
the case of small-scale language models. To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel approach called the selective
filtering reasoner (SelF-Reasoner) that assesses the entailment relationship between the question and the candidate
reasoning chain. Then, we proceed with CoT reasoning when the reasoning chain demonstrates confidence;
otherwise, we opt to predict the answer directly. SelF-Reasoner improves the fine-tuned T5 baseline consistently over
the ScienceQA, ECQA, and LastLetter tasks. Code is available at

arXiv:2403.19167v1 [cs.CL] 28 Mar 2024

1.
Introduction

Question: What is the result of applying for a job?
Choices: (a) anxiety and fear (b) increased workload
(c) praise (d) less sleep (e) being employed
Ground Truth CoT: Applying for a job is followed by
attending interview which results in being employed.
Applying for a job may not result in the other options.
Answer: The answer is being employed.

“I will select their good qualities and follow
them, their bad qualities and avoid them.”

Confucius (551 BC - 479 BC)

Large language models (Brown et al., 2020;
Thoppilan et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery
et al., 2022, LLMs) have exhibited impressive
capabilities in various reasoning tasks, including
arithmetic and symbolic reasoning, by generating
intermediate chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning
steps (Nye et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Kojima
et al., 2022).
Although CoT approaches have shown improve-
ments in reasoning performance and interoperabil-
ity, there are still two main challenges that hinder
the widespread adoption of those approaches:
(i) indecomposable questions, which refer to
simple questions that cannot be decomposed into
smaller sub-questions; (ii) erroneous reasoning
chains, which involve mistakes in the logical and
commonsense reasoning processes (Wei et al.,
2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022),
and may even result in hallucinations (Wang
et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2023) or unfaithful
explanations (Turpin et al., 2023).
The above imperfect nature of CoT essentially
leads to inferior results when using CoT instead
of directly predicting answers,
especially for

Generated wrong CoT: People generally get praise when
they get accepted for a job. When one applies for a
job, they get praise. Anxiety and fear is not the
result of applying for a job. Increased workload is
not the result of applying for a job. Less sleep is
not the result of applying for a job. Being employed
is not the result of applying for a job.
Extracted incorrect answer: The answer is praise.

Figure 1: An example of an invalid CoT reasoning
from ECQA (Aggarwal et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2023).
The errors are highlighted in red.
The
generated CoT is wrong at the first step, and
the error continues to the end. However, when
altering to direct prediction, this one-step reasoning
question is solved correctly.

small-scale language models prone to generating
flawed reasoning chains (Zhang et al., 2023).
Consequently, small-scale language models are
unlikely to achieve better reasoning performance
with self-generated CoT alone, unless distilling
the effective CoT from LLMs to minimize the
occurrence of erroneous reasoning chains (Li et al.,
2022a; Magister et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022).

Existing studies have proposed verification
methods to improve the correctness of reasoning
chains (Cobbe et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023;
Diao et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Lightman
et al., 2023).
However,
they deal with all

∗Corresponding authors. This paper was partially
supported by Joint Research Project of Yangtze River
Delta Science and Technology Innovation Community
(No. 2022CSJGG1400) and Joint Funds of the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U21B2020).

Zero-Shot CoT.
Kojima et al. (2022) showed that
LLMs are good zero-shot reasoners who already
obtain the capability to reason from large-scale
pretraining. A task-agnostic magic spell like Let’s
think step by step can make the LLMs generate
the immediate reasoning steps and give the final
answer. However, we do not find similar behavior
in the smaller language models, mainly due to the
limited training data and memory ability.
Fine-
tuning with a specific generation format further
reduces the possibility of doing Zero-Shot CoT.
So we fine-tune language models to generate
reasoning chains instead of Zero-Shot CoT.

Few-Shot CoT.
Few-Shot CoT achieves more
robust performance by harnessing reasoning ability
with the help of specially designed or self-created
reasoning demonstrations.
Researchers have
been looking into various strategies to enhance
the effectiveness of Few-Shot CoT. Least-to-
most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022) decomposes
complex problems into more manageable sub-
problems to be solved sequentially. Wang et al.
(2022c) introduced a self-consistency decoding
strategy in that various reasoning trajectories are
sampled to vote for the final answer. Cobbe et al.
(2021) further trained verifiers on math problems
to rank the candidate reasoning chains to get the
most reliable reasoning chain. However, significant
effort is still necessary to build the human-
annotated reasoning chains in these methods. To
overcome this limit, Zhang et al. (2022) proposed
Auto-CoT utilizing Zero-Shot CoT and clustering to
generate reasoning demonstrations automatically.
The performance of Few-Shot CoT can be
influenced by the context and quality of the thought
processes involved in the demonstrations.
On
certain specific tasks, utilizing fine-tuned language
models may result in superior performance
compared to using few-shot prompting LLMs.

2.
Related Work

Two lines of research are key to our work: chain
of thought prompting and fine-tuning language
models to reason.

2.2.
Fine-tuning Language Models to
Reason

Inspired by the success of CoT in LLMs, we
investigate the possibility of applying CoT fine-
tuning to smaller language models. Concurrent
works (Li et al., 2022a; Magister et al., 2022; Ho
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2023)

2.1.
Chain-of-thought Prompting

CoT prompting is a gradient-free strategy that
encourages LLMs to generate the incremental
thought processes required to reach a desirable

COT
Filter

Answerer

Q

Valid/Invalid

[a] Vanilla Finetuning Q→A

Solution
QR

Switch

Reasoner

Compound

Q

[b] Compound Generator Q→RA

Answerer

A

Reasoner
Answerer

[c] Pipeline Q→R→A
[d] SelF-Reasoner

Figure 2: (a) Vanilla fine-tuning model that directly predicts the answer. (b) A compound generator that
produces the reasoning chain and the answer simultaneously. (c) The two-level pipeline produces the
reasoning chain first and then extracts the answer from it. (d) Our SelF-Reasoner. The Reasoner is
fine-tuned to generate a solution based on the input question description. The Answerer is the model
that can predict the answer directly or extract the answer from a question-solution pair. CoT Filter can
determine whether the solution generated can be passed to the Answerer. Here, Q stands for Question,
R stands for Reasoning Chain, and A stands for Answer. The symbol QR means concatenating Q and R,
RA means concatenating R and A.

3.
Approach

mainly utilize LLMs to create reliable reasoning
chains, but these techniques still depend on
LLMs. Hsieh et al. (2023) frames CoT learning
as multi-task learning with rationales and shows
their method can reduce the model size and the
training data to achieve better performance than
LLM. Wang et al. (2023) utilizes LLM to generate
CoT and fine-tunes a smaller answerer under
counterfactual training to make sounder use of the
rationales. However, these works don’t discard
the produced invalid CoT even if it will lead to
an incorrect answer. In our work, we focus on
the fine-tuning process, and, different from Wang
et al. (2023), we explicitly introduce a CoT filter to
alleviate the effects of misleading CoTs.

This section will first present the details of our
baseline for comparisons and our design of the
SelF-Reasoner.

3.1.
Baselines

We conduct experiments on three baselines:
vanilla fine-tuning, compound generator, and two-
level pipeline. For simplicity, let Q denote Question,
R denote Reasoning Chain, and A denote Answer.
Format Q-R means to input the question and
generate the reasoning chain.

Vanilla Fine-tuning.
In this setting (Figure 2 (a)),
we fine-tune the model only to generate the final
answer (format Q-A). Concretely, given the input
question, the model generates the answer directly:

Lu et al. (2022a) constructed a multimodal
benchmark called Science Question Answering
(ScienceQA) and fine-tuned language models to
produce reasoning chains utilizing the annotated
rationales in the dataset. They found that smaller
language models, such as UnifiedQA (Khashabi
et al., 2020), can benefit from CoT fine-tuning.
However, in their setting, the model first provides
the answer and then the reasoning chain, which
only focuses on rationalization like WT5 (Raffel
et al., 2019). In this paper, we thoroughly examine
the CoT fine-tuning on this dataset and reflect on
the provided reasoning chains.

A = Answerer(Q).
(1)

Compound Generator.
The compound gener-
ator (Figure 2 (b)) produces the reasoning chain
and final answer simultaneously. Given the input
question, the compound generator generates an
output sequence with the reasoning chain and
answer:

{R, A} = Compound(Q).
(2)

Depending on the positions of the reasoning
chain and answer, we name the format where

Two-level Pipeline.
In the two-level pipeline
(Figure 2 (c)), there are a reasoner and an
answer extractor. The reasoner produces only the
reasoning chain and appends it to the question.
Then the answer extractor extracts the final
answer:

4.
Experiments

This
section
will
describe
our
experimental
setup regarding datasets, language models, and
evaluation, and present the main results.

R
=
Compound(Q),
(3)

4.1.
Datasets

A
=
Answerer(Q ◦R).
(4)

We use ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022a), ECQA (Ag-
garwal et al., 2021; Talmor et al., 2019) and
LastLetter for our experiments.
ScienceQA
is a benchmark that consists of multimodal
multiple-choice questions with a diverse set of
science topics and annotations of their answers
with corresponding lectures and explanations.
ECQA is a human-annotated version of Common-
senseQA (Talmor et al., 2019), which is a 5-choice
QA dataset assessing general commonsense
reasoning using concepts from ConceptNet (Speer
et al., 2018). LastLetter is the task of concatenating
the last letters of given words. More details about
datasets can be found in Appendix A.1.

The reasoner is fine-tuned in the format Q-
R, and the extractor is fine-tuned in the format
QR-A. We will show that the reasoner can
provide misleading reasoning chains, leading to
the answer extractor producing incorrect responses
(Section 4.4 & 5.1).
In light of this finding, a
CoT filter that identifies invalid CoTs has been
integrated into the system to form the SelF-
Reasoner introduced in the following subsection.

3.2.
SelF-Reasoner

The SelF-Reasoner (Figure 2 (d)) consists of a
reasoner, an answerer, and a CoT filter.
The
reasoner is fine-tuned on the format Q-R:

4.2.
Language Models

R = Compound(Q).
(5)

We use UnifiedQA-T5 (Khashabi et al., 2020) as
our primary language model to align with the
experiments on the ScienceQA paper. Also, the
imperfect nature of CoT is more salient in such
language models. We select UnifiedQA-T5-small
(60M), UnifiedQA-T5-base (220M), and UnifiedQA-
T5-large (770M). More implementation details are
included in Appendix A.2.

The CoT filter will determine whether the
reasoning chain is valid, thus filtering out incorrect
reasoning chains. To train the CoT verifier, we
use the generated CoT from the two-level pipeline
to construct QR-label pair. If the generated CoT
leads to the correct answer, then label this CoT
as valid (label=1). Otherwise, the label is invalid
(label=0):
v = Verify(Q ◦R).
(6)

4.3.
Evaluation

The answerer is fine-tuned on the format Q-A
augmented with the format QR-A, so it can directly
predict the final answer or extract the answer from
the question-CoT pair.

We use the accuracy of the answer (exactly
matching for produced answer sentence) to
measure the performance.
To measure the
quality of the generated reasoning chain, we use
automatic metrics, such as BLEU-1/4 (Papineni
et al., 2002), ROUGE-L (Papineni et al., 2002),
and sentence similarity, as the settings on the
ScienceQA paper. We use the Sentence-BERT
network (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) to encode
the generated and ground truth reasoning chains
and compute the cosine similarity as the metric
Similarity.

(
Answerer(Q ◦R),
v = 1
Answerer(Q),
v = 0.
(7)

A =

To train the verifier, we use the T5 (Raffel et al.,
2020) encoder extended with a linear classification
layer as our verifier model. We load the convergent
checkpoint of the answerer as the initial parameters

SelF-Reasoner Performs the Best.
Our SelF-
Reasoner gets the best performance consistently
over the ScienceQA, ECQA, and LastLetter tasks.
On the ScienceQA benchmark (Table 1), the
base and large SelF-Reasoner models guarantee
significant improvement over the pipeline, and
slightly outperform the strong vanilla fine-tuning
model under both base and large sizes, respec-
tively. Specifically, our best SelF-Reasoner model
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art model
(among the text-only models) Chameleon (GPT-4).
Our SelF-Reasoner also significantly outperforms
GPT-3 (CoT) by 12.07% and ChatGPT (CoT) by
8.93%, using a much smaller model size.
SelF-Reasoner also performs the best on ECQA.
Table 3 presents the accuracy performance on
the ECQA dataset. Though the T5-base model
can not learn to produce CoT as well as human
experts, the verifier alleviates the insufficiency and
boosts the accuracy. SelF-Reasoner successfully
meets our goal of creating a highly accurate
and interpretable model.
There is still a gap
between the SelF-Reasoner and PINTO (61.67%
as reported in Wang et al. (2023)) because PINTO
gets LLMs involved to produce the rationale at
test time, which can cause large computation or
memory costs. In contrast, our approach does not
rely on LLMs; thus it is more generally effective.
On the LastLetter task (Table 4), where the
pipeline outperforms the vanilla fine-tuning, SelF-
Reasoner can still benefit the performance. We
apply the simple rule that "the given word should
appear in the valid CoT" to filter out invalid CoTs
because we find that the reasoner often replaces
the given word due to randomness in sampling.
For example, "speakers" can be replaced by
"speaking".
Without much overhead, the SelF-
Reasoner outperforms the pipeline by 3.26%.
Overall, the results show that SelF-Reasoner
successfully meets our goal of creating a highly
accurate and interpretable model. The positive
outcome indicates the significance of the CoT filter
in fine-tuning language models. A detailed analysis
of the pipeline component and the CoT filter has
been conducted in Section 5.1 and Section 5.2,
respectively.

4.4.
Main Results

In this section, we will present the main results
and observations of our baselines, followed by a
discussion of our SelF-Reasoner. Table 1 presents
the main results of SelF-Reasoner compared
with our baselines and existing methods of the
ScienceQA benchmark.
Tabel 3 presents the
results of the ECQA dataset. Table 4 presents
the results of the LastLetter task.

Vanilla Fine-tuning is a Strong Baseline.
On
ScienceQA benchmark, UnifiedQALarge achieves
an accuracy of 86.53%, which is close to the
human performance from Table 1, indicating that
vanilla fine-tuning is a strong baseline.1 Despite
the high accuracy, vanilla fine-tuning still lacks
interpretability. Then our next objective is to further
elicit the model’s reasoning capacity to explain its
thought process while maintaining its accuracy.

Compound Generator Suffers from Imperfect
CoT.
The accuracy of CoT fine-tuning is lower
than that of vanilla fine-tuning, in contrast to the
benefits of CoT prompting in LLMs.
The main
reason is that the loss of the answer part is
weakened by the CoT part. We also observe that
the outputs are too lengthy in the setting of RA;
thus, answers are not given due to the maximum
length limits. We find that the ratios of missing
answers in the training set are 0.8% in format Q-
EA and 5.9% in format Q-LEA. Due to the answer
missing issue, the performance of the Q-RA model
is inferior to that of the Q-AR model, in agreement
with the findings reported in Lu et al. (2022a).
However, we do not adopt the AR format because
it is more of a posterior rationalization than a CoT.

The Pipeline Method Narrows the Gap in
Performance.
The pipeline method narrows the
gap between the compound generator and the
vanilla fine-tuning (Table 1).
We conduct a
thorough evaluation of the produced reasoning
chain in Section 5.1. By evaluating the respective
cases, we find that some questions that the

5.
Analysis

1There is a 13% discrepancy between the perfor-
mance of vanilla fine-tuning reported by ours and Lu et al.
(2022a). The discrepancy is discussed in Appendix A.4.

To understand how SelF-Reasoner works and
gain insights, we analyze the generated reasoning

Human
-
Q-A
88.4
GPT-3 (CoT)
In-Context Learning
Q-ALE
75.17
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-A
70.12
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-AE
73.33
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-ALE
74.11

Lu et al.
(2022a)

ChatGPT (CoT)
In-Context Learning
Q-EA
78.31
GPT-4 (CoT)
In-Context Learning
Q-EA
83.99
Chameleon (ChatGPT)
In-Context Learning
Q-EA
79.93
Chameleon (GPT-4)
In-Context Learning
Q-EA
86.54

Lu et al.
(2023)

Vanilla
UnifiedQASamll
fine-tuning
Q-A
71.54
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-A
83.09
UnifiedQALarge
fine-tuning
Q-A
86.53

Compound
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-ALE
76.13
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-EA
77.71
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-LEA
73.97

Pipeline
UnifiedQASmall
fine-tuning
Q-E→QE-A
66.37
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
Q-E→QE-A
79.32
UnifiedQALarge
fine-tuning
Q-E→QE-A
84.98

SelF-Reasoner
UnifiedQASmall
fine-tuning
SelF-Reasoner
69.55
UnifiedQABase
fine-tuning
SelF-Reasoner
83.45
UnifiedQALarge
fine-tuning
SelF-Reasoner
87.24

Table 1:
Accuracy (%) of each baseline on test split. In the format part, Q = Question, A = Answer,
E = Explanation, L = Lecture. We list the results from ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022a), ChatGPT, GPT-4
(Lu et al., 2023) for comparison. L and E can be treated as reasoning chain. So LEA/EA and ALE/AE
correspond to the standard RA and AR as defined in Section 3.1, respectively. Our SelF-Reasoner
(Large) is comparable in accuracy to a human’s.

Model
Split
BLEU-1
BLEU-4
ROUGE-L
Similarity
Complete
Entailment
Correct

Base
Lead to Correct Answer
0.914
0.776
0.910
0.937
1.00
1.00
0.94
Lead to Incorrect Answer
0.789
0.660
0.797
0.860
1.00
1.00
0.02
All
0.892
0.756
0.891
0.924
-
-
-

Large
Lead to Correct Answer
0.937
0.810
0.929
0.949
1.00
0.98
0.96
Lead to Incorrect Answer
0.775
0.642
0.784
0.847
1.00
1.00
0.02
All
0.917
0.788
0.910
0.936
-
-
-

Table 2:
Automatic metrics (BLEU-1/4, ROUGE-L, Similarity) and human evaluation of generated
explanations. We evaluate these metrics on different splits of the produced CoT according to whether
they can lead to the correct answer. Details of human evaluation are shown in Appendix A.8.

Reasoner is shown in Figure 1. More cases can
be found in Appendix A.9, Table 9, Table 10, and
Table 11 in Appendix.

Method
Vanilla Pipeline SelF-Reasoner

Accuracy 58.07
54.95
58.48 (+3.5)

Table 3:
Accuracy (%) on test split of ECQA.
The backbone model is UnifiedQA-base. SelF-
Reasoner outperforms the pipeline by 3.5%.

5.1.
Analysis on Generated Reasoning
Chains

Method
Vanilla Pipeline SelF-Reasoner

In this section, we evaluate the pipeline component
of SelF-Reasoner by analyzing the produced
reasoning chains. The evaluation includes both
automatic metrics and human evaluation, and 50
examples from each data split are sampled for
the human evaluation. The results show that the
system makes some typical mistakes in the primary
parts of the reasoning chains it produces.
We
also discuss the obstruction to generating perfect

Accuracy 64.22
76.80
80.06 (+3.26)

Table 4: Accuracy (%) on test split of LastLetter.
The backbone model is UnifiedQA-base. SelF-
Reasoner outperforms the pipeline by 3.26%.

chains and the influence of the CoT filter.
An
incorrect CoT generated and filtered out by SelF-

Small
71.54
66.37
68.76
69.55
Base
83.09
79.32
81.61
83.45
Large
86.53
84.98
86.09
87.24

Base
Base
76.96
76.39
76.84 0.841
Large
81.30
81.64
81.37 0.874

Large
Base
74.97
75.03
74.98 0.836
Large
80.07
78.17
79.78 0.871

Table 5: Ablation on the CoT filter on ScienceQA
benchmark. Random refers to randomly choosing
vanilla fine-tuning and pipeline to produce the
answer.

Table 6: Accuracy and F1 score of the CoT filter
on classifying the generated reasoning chain on
ScienceQA benchmark. Valid/Invalid Acc refers to
the filter’s accuracy in discriminating valid/invalid
reasoning chains. Acc is the overall accuracy.

reasoning chains.

CoT fine-tuned model can produce invalid
reasoning chains.
In Table 2,
BLEU and
ROUGE metrics of correct samples are higher
than the ones of incorrect samples, suggesting a
quality gap in produced reasoning chains. The high
Similarity metric (over 0.8) of invalid CoT indicates
that the structure of the invalid CoT is similar to
the ground truth. The human evaluation draws the
same conclusion.
The case study illustrates that the key and
necessary objects, described as "bridging objects"
in Wang et al. (2022b), of the invalid reasoning
chain mainly differ from the ground truth.
We
conclude some typical mistakes: (i) The bridging
objects are missing; (ii) The bridging objects are
mismatched; for example, feature A is attributed to
object B, and feature B is attributed to object A; (iii)
The bridging objects are wrong. These mistakes
suggest the small language models are deficient
in memorizing knowledge.

0.85

Test Accuracy

0.80

large pipeline
base pipeline
small pipeline

0.75

0.70

small
base
large
Filter Size

Figure 3: The "scaling law" in the size of the CoT
filter and pipeline on ScienceQA benchmark. The
dashed line presents the accuracy of the pipeline.

the random baseline, indicating the significance of
the filter.
We further evaluate the prediction accuracy of
the CoT filter for classifying the produced CoT
from the base and large generators (Table 6).
The filters demonstrate comparable capability in
discriminating valid and invalid reasoning chains,
though there is still potential for advancement.
About 30% CoTs are filtered out by the filter, while
the invalid CoT rate is about 25%.

Incorrect reasoning chains can be traced back
to both the model itself and the training data
used.
The model struggles to memorize all the
necessary knowledge for the reasoning process,
leading to errors in crucial parts of the reasoning
chain.
Our analysis of the training data revealed
that certain reasoning chains on the ScienceQA
dataset do not precisely conform to the chain-of-
thought format. More discussion can be found in
Appendix A.7. Potential future work could focus on
the impact of the reasoning chain’s format on the
CoT fine-tuning.

"Scaling Law" of SelF-Reasoner
Figure 3
shows the "scaling law" in the size of the CoT
filter and pipeline. A CoT filter can consistently
enhance the accuracy of pipelines. As the filter
is made larger, the improvement can be more
significant; however, augmenting the size of a
pipeline often leads to diminishing returns in terms
of improvement, suggesting that a larger generator
can produce invalid reasoning chains that are more
similar to valid ones, thereby making it harder for
the filter to differentiate them.
We include the discussion on the upper bound
of the Self-Reasoner in Appendix A.6.

5.2.
Influence of the CoT Filter

This section discusses the CoT filter component
of SelF-Reasoner. The influence of the filter on
the pipeline is evaluated, and the upper bound
capabilities of SelF-Reasoner with an ideal filter
are discussed.

6.
Discussion

In the discussion section, we delve into several
key aspects related to CoT fine-tuning and
the challenges associated with optimizing the

The CoT Filter’s Contribution to Better Accu-
racy
Table 5 demonstrates the ablation on the
CoT filter. SelF-Reasoner constantly outperforms

Small language models may encounter significant
obstacles in generating both reasoning chains and
answers in a single turn, owing to the restricted
maximum input and output length. Furthermore,
it can be difficult for these models to maintain
coherence in longer output sequences.
Due
to their limited number of parameters, small
language models may suffer from difficulties in
fully internalizing the intricate relationships present
within the training data.
This can result in a
weaker understanding of the relationship between
questions and answers when the primary focus is
on learning the structure and complex relationships
within reasoning chains. Additionally, it should be
noted that not all tokens within a reasoning chain
hold equal importance. This can lead to the model
utilizing its already insufficient parameters to retain
less important tokens and potentially overlooking
crucial information. To address these issues, future
research can explore the implementation of joint
training methods that incorporate both rationale
loss and answer loss.
Moreover, incorporating
token rank information, as annotated within the
reasoning chains of the training data, into the
training process may improve the performance of
fine-tuning CoT in language models.

6.1.
CoT Fine-tuning in a Specific Task

In this work, we observe that LLMs like GPT-
3 may not consistently outperform fine-tuned
small language models, even in tasks that involve
generating complex and lengthy chain-of-thought
sequences.
This may be attributed to the fact
that randomly chosen CoT prompts for LLMs
may not effectively elicit optimal performance
from LLMs, as the process of constructing such
prompts can be both time-consuming and costly.
Additionally, utilizing a small language model to
achieve superior performance in a specific task is
often a more straightforward approach regarding
training and deployment.

6.2.
The Role of the Reasoning Chain

Through the case study, we find that the small
language model benefits from templated reasoning
chains due to its limited capacity.
Despite the
success of our model on the three datasets, the
specific role of the reasoning chain within the
prediction procedure remains uncertain. To further
investigate the impact of the reasoning chain,
future research may employ adversarial techniques
such as incorporating noise and altering key parts
("bridging objects") or the reasoning templates,
as outlined in Wang et al. (2022b). This will aid
in determining whether the improvement comes
from the extra information introduced by the
reasoning chain during the training phase or if
the reasoning structure plays a significant role.
Moreover, potential future work could focus on the
impact of the reasoning chain’s format on the CoT
fine-tuning.

6.5.
Reflections on the Reasoning
Chains from the Dataset

The reasoning chains in the training data play
a crucial role in CoT fine-tuning.
There exists
a trade-off between templated reasoning chains
and those of diverse forms.
The use of
templated forms allows for models to learn the
reasoning skeleton more efficiently, enabling them
to focus more on learning the knowledge and
the relationship between the question and the
answer. However, this approach results in a lack
of diversity in the produced CoT and is therefore
not suitable for implementing techniques such as
self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022c) to further
improve performance. On the other hand, utilizing
more diverse training data poses a challenge
for the model to learn effectively.
Additionally,
the annotation of reasoning chains for existing
benchmarks requires a significant amount of effort.
Human annotation is costly and time-consuming,
and the reasoning chains annotated by humans
may not adhere to the correct CoT format. One
potential approach to replace human annotation
is to utilize large language models to generate
reasoning chains. However, the inference of LLMs
is also costly, and their performance is not perfect.
The CoT produced by large language models may
still be incorrect and misleading, therefore requiring

6.3.
The Role of CoT Filter

The comprehensive evaluation of the reasoning
chain is still dependent on human labor to examine
individual sentences. Assessing the correctness of
the reasoning chain, instead of merely determining
if it leads to the correct answer, remains a complex
task. The CoT filter enhances the accuracy and
interpretability of the SelF-Reasoner, enabling
the exclusion of misleading CoTs. However, the
method of detecting invalid reasoning chains from
valid ones is not currently understood.
Future
research can focus on developing interpretable
filtering techniques utilizing rationalization methods
and creating a toolkit for analyzing the quality of
reasoning chains to aid in advancing CoT studies.

7.
Conclusion

This paper presents a method using fine-tuning
to enhance the reasoning abilities of a language
model. Additionally, we incorporate a CoT filter that
can identify and exclude invalid CoTs to form SelF-
Reasoner, thereby preventing invalid CoTs from
negatively impacting the final answer prediction.
The proposed SelF-Reasoner shows a significant
performance improvement compared to two-level
pipeline approaches, guaranteeing interpretability
while maintaining accuracy.
In addition, our
approach has been shown generally effective
across
datasets,
which
achieves
consistent
performance gains on the ScienceQA, ECQA, and
LastLetter datasets. We also conduct an in-depth
analysis of the reasoning chains and training data
to identify obstacles to achieving perfect CoT.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob
Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung,
Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker
Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko,
Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes,
Yi Tay,
Noam Shazeer,
Vinodkumar Prab-
hakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson,
Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin,
Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Sunipa
Dev,
Henryk
Michalewski,
Xavier
Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam
Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David
Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander
Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani
Agrawal,
Mark Omernick,
Andrew M. Dai,
Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie
Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon
Child,
Oleksandr
Polozov,
Katherine
Lee,
Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta,
Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason
Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff
Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways.

Limitations

Three limitations may be addressed in future
studies. The first limitation is the increased model
size over a single model because we need to train
an additional filter. The second limitation is that the
filter may still spare incorrect rationales, which can
be improved by more effective negative sampling
strategies in the filter training. The third limitation
is that we evaluate our method in three datasets
because most datasets lack effective annotated
CoT for fine-tuning.

Ethical Considerations

The primary ethical concern related to this work is
the potential for bias in the content generated by
the fine-tuned language models used. However,
because the focus of this work is the science
or commonsense question-answering task, which
relies on objective world knowledge and facts
rather than subjective statements, the issue of bias
is not as significant.

Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavar-
ian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton,
Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math
word problems.

References

Shourya Aggarwal, Divyanshu Mandowara, Vish-
wajeet Agrawal, Dinesh Khandelwal, Parag
Singla, and Dinesh Garg. 2021. Explanations
for CommonsenseQA: New Dataset and Models.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 3050–3065, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Shizhe Diao, Pengcheng Wang, Yong Lin, and
Tong Zhang. 2023. Active prompting with chain-
of-thought for large language models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.12246.

Alexey Dosovitskiy,
Lucas Beyer,
Alexander
Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai,
Thomas
Unterthiner,
Mostafa
Dehghani,
Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly,
Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2020. An

Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson,
Jakub Adamek,
Eric Malmi,
and Aliaksei
Severyn. 2022. Teaching small language models
to reason.

Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun.
2022. Large language models are reasoning
teachers.

Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-Kuan Yeh,
Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alexander
Ratner, Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and
Tomas Pfister. 2023.
Distilling step-by-step!
outperforming larger language models with less
training data and smaller model sizes.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-
Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten
Bosma, David Luan, et al. 2022. Show your work:
Scratchpads for intermediate computation with
language models. In Deep Learning for Code
Workshop.

Daniel Khashabi, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal,
Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2020.
Unifiedqa: Crossing format
boundaries with a single QA system. CoRR,
abs/2005.00700.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward,
and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002.
Bleu:
A method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting
on Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL ’02, page 311–318, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid,
Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022.
Large language models are zero-shot reasoners.
In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David
Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners.

Shiyang Li, Jianshu Chen, Yelong Shen, Zhiyu
Chen, Xinlu Zhang, Zekun Li, Hong Wang, Jing
Qian, Baolin Peng, Yi Mao, Wenhu Chen, and
Xifeng Yan. 2022a.
Explanations from large
language models make small reasoners better.

Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai,
Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song,
John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman
Ring,
Susannah
Young,
Eliza
Rutherford,
Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer,
Richard Powell, George van den Driessche,
Lisa Anne Hendricks,
Maribeth Rauh,
Po-
Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl,
Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron Huang, Jonathan
Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia
Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen,
Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David
Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan,
Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens,
Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida
Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic
Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch,
Jean-Baptiste Lespiau,
Maria Tsimpoukelli,
Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong,
Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume,
Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor
Babuschkin,
Aidan
Clark,
Diego
de
Las
Casas,
Aurelia Guy,
Chris Jones,
James
Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman,
Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac,
Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell,
Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff
Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis,
Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021.
Scaling language models: Methods, analysis &
insights from training gopher.

Shiyang Li, Jianshu Chen, Yelong Shen, Zhiyu
Chen, Xinlu Zhang, Zekun Li, Hong Wang, Jing
Qian, Baolin Peng, Yi Mao, Wenhu Chen, and
Xifeng Yan. 2022b.
Explanations from large
language models make small reasoners better.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda,
Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl
Cobbe. 2023. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.20050.

Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu,
Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord,
Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022a. Learn to
explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains
for science question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.09513.

Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley,
Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu,
and Jianfeng Gao. 2023.
Chameleon: Plug-
and-play compositional reasoning with large
language models.

Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian
Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2022b. Fantasti-
cally ordered prompts and where to find them:
Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts,
Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020.
Exploring the limits of transfer learning with
a unified text-to-text transformer.
JMLR,
21(140):1–67.

Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and
Samuel R Bowman. 2023. Language models
don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful
explanations in
chain-of-thought
prompting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04388.

Boshi Wang, Xiang Deng, and Huan Sun. 2022a.
Iteratively prompt pre-trained language models
for chain of thought. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2714–2730.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese
BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Boshi Wang, Sewon Min, Xiang Deng, Jiaming
Shen, You Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Huan Sun.
2022b. Towards understanding chain-of-thought
prompting: An empirical study of what matters.

Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi.
2018.
Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual
graph of general knowledge.

Peifeng Wang, Aaron Chan, Filip Ilievski, Muhao
Chen, and Xiang Ren. 2023.
Pinto: Faithful
language reasoning using prompt-generated
rationales.

Jiashuo Sun, Yi Luo, Yeyun Gong, Chen Lin,
Yelong Shen, Jian Guo, and Nan Duan. 2023.
Enhancing chain-of-thoughts prompting with
iterative bootstrapping in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11657.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans,
Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. 2022c.
Self-consistency improves chain of thought
reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.11171.

Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie,
and Jonathan Berant. 2019. CommonsenseQA:
A
question
answering
challenge
targeting
commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4149–
4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. 2022.
Chain of thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and
Alex Smola. 2022. Automatic chain of thought
prompting in large language models.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-
Tze Cheng,
Alicia Jin,
Taylor Bos,
Leslie
Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee,
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo
Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry
Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong
Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten
Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-
Ching Chang,
Igor Krivokon,
Will Rusch,
Marc Pickett, Pranesh Srinivasan, Laichee
Man, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel
Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos,
Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben Zevenbergen,
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben
Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina,

Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Hai Zhao,
George Karypis, and Alex Smola. 2023. Multi-
modal chain-of-thought reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00923.

Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Shafiq Joty, Cheng-
wei Qin, and Lidong Bing. 2023.
Verify-and-
edit: A knowledge-enhanced chain-of-thought
framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03268.

Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason
Wei,
Nathan Scales,
Xuezhi Wang,
Dale
Schuurmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and
Ed Chi. 2022. Least-to-most prompting enables
complex reasoning in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625.

A.1.
Dataset

We provide more details on the datasets used in
our experiments.
ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022a) is a multimodal
dataset
annotated
with
reasoning
chains
by
human
experts.
It
is
available
at

On
ScienceQA,
a data example consists of multimodal question-
answering information annotated with background
lecture and explanation.
We use the captions
provided in the dataset, which are generated by
the model based on ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)
and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) to replace the
visual context following (Lu et al., 2022b). The task
is formulated as a text-to-text problem where the
input Q is a concatenation of question, context,
and options and the output is the reasoning chain
R or answer A depending on the role of the
module as defined in Section 3.
ECQA is a human-annotated version of Com-
monsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019). The original
CommonsenseQA is available at
nlp.sites.tau.ac.il/commonsenseqa. ECQA version
is available at
Dataset. PINTO (Wang et al., 2023) also provides
a version annotated by LLM.
LastLetter is a task to concatenate the last letter
of the given words. We constructed the dataset
from the Google-10000-English repository.
We
sample 10,000 groups for training and 5,000 for
tests (averagely split ranging from 1 to 5 words).
The test words are not seen in training words.
We provide the dataset statistics in Table 7.

A.4.
Discussion on Different Vanilla
Fine-tuning Result Compared to Lu
et al. (2022a)

The difference in the training setting can contribute
to the discrepancy. Although we use the same
training batch size and learning rate as Lu et al.
(2022a), there are still variances in the details. We
have a rating decay of 0.01, and we predict the
answer directly instead of the choice. Furthermore,
the difference in training time and convergence
state also influences performance. Our result is
double-checked by rerunning the experiments.

A.5.
Confusion Matrice

Reasoner
Method Used
Correct Otherwise Both Fail

Base
Directly Predict
154
358
Extract
71
119

Large
Directly Predict
124
277
Extract
38
102

Table 8: Confusion matrices of the SelF-Reasoner
on the incorrect cases. Method Used refers to the
adopted method to predict the answer. Correct
Otherwise means if the other method were used,
the question could be solved. Both Fail means
neither method can solve the question.

Table 7: Dataset statistics used in our experiments.

A.6.
Upper Bound of the SelF-Reasoner

Dataset
Train Validation Test

The confusion matrices in Table 8 demonstrate
the errors made by SelF-Reasoner. There is a
certain amount of complex questions that can not
be solved using both methods, indicating that the
upper bound of SelF-Reasoner with an ideal filter
is approximately 89% for base and 91% for large.

ScienceQA 12726
4241
4241
ECQA
8520
1221
1221
LastLetter
10000
5000
5000

A.2.
Implementation Details

We fine-tune the UnifiedQA for 20 epochs with
a learning rate of 4e-5 and a weight decay of
0.01. We use batches of 4. We trained the base
and large SelF-Reasoners on Nvidia RTX 2080Ti
for 20 and 60 hours, respectively. The reported
results are from models trained for 20 epochs. The
maximum input sequence length is 512.

A.7.
Incorrect CoT Format

One typical example is sorting words in alphabet-
ical order, as seen in Figure 4. The background
lecture about alphabetical order is too extensive
for the model to process, and the solution part is
overly simplistic, resembling a fill-in-the-blank task
rather than a logical step-by-step problem-solving

A.3.
Verifier Training Details

2In ScienceQA, the convergent two-level pipeline can
reach a score of 90% in the training set. So we use a
subpar reasoner which scores 60% in the training set to
generate invalid instances.

To construct the training data of the verifier, we
run the pipeline model on the training data. The
instances with reasoning chain leading to correct

ground truth CoT: Pictures frames are
usually either hung on a wall or kept on a
flat surface. A table has a flat surface. Art
show usually does not have pictures that
are not hung on the wall. Wall is a vertical
surface. It is not possible to avoid hanging
a picture vertically on a wall. Newspaper
is an irrelevant option. Pictures are not
generally hung in a car.

Question: Which word would you find on a dictionary page
with the following guide words, shot–suit?
Options: (a) service, (b) stockade.

In dataset: Guide words appear on each page of a dictionary.
They tell you the first word and last word on the page. The
other words on the page come between the guide words in
alphabetical order. To put words in alphabetical order, put
them in order by their first letters. If the first letters are the
same, look at the second letters. If the second letters are the
same, look at the third letters, and so on. If one word is
shorter, and there are no more letters to compare, then the
shorter word comes first in alphabetical order. For example,
be comes before bed. Put the words in alphabetical order.
Since stockade is between the guide words shot - suit, it
would be found on that page.

prediction: Answer: The answer is wall.
reference: Answer: The answer is table.

More cases are shown in Table 9, Table 10, and
Table 11.

Expected: The alphabetical order of words is determined by
order of letters in words. In English, the letters of the alphabet
are arranged in a specific order. The first letters are the same.
Comparing the second letters, the order is: ‘e’ of ‘service’ , ‘h’
of ‘shot’, ‘t’ of ‘stockade’, ‘u’ of ‘suit’. So ‘stockade’ comes
in between ‘shot’ and ‘suit’.

Figure 4: An example that does not conform to
the CoT format and an expected reasoning chain.
Blue texts are the knowledge lectures and Orange
texts are the solutions.

A.8.
Human Evaluation

In the human evaluation process, the specifications
of the three metrics are as follows.
Complete
means the model generates a complete CoT (No
early stop or repeating). Entailment means the
extracted answer entails the CoT. Correctness
means the reasoning chain is correct and relevant
to the question (No irrelevant entities or verbs).
50 examples from each data split are sampled
randomly for human evaluation.

A.9.
Case Study

Following is a case from ECQA. The model
generates a half-correct CoT. However,
the
answerer is misled by the generated CoT and
gives an incorrect prediction. However, in SelF-
Reasoner, the generated CoT is filtered and the
answerer gives a correct prediction based on the
question.

question: Where can you put a picture
frame when it’s not hung vertically?
choices: (A) wall. (B) newspaper (C) table
(D) Car

generated CoT: Picture frames are
hung vertically on the wall.(Correct
part)
Picture
frames
are
not
hung
vertically on the art show. Newspaper

Table 9: Demonstrations from ScienceQA.
Q: Which of these organisms contains matter that was once part of the lichen? Choices: (A) bilberry (B)
mushroom.
Predicted rationale: Use the arrows to follow how matter moves through this food web. For each answer choice,
try to find a path of arrows that starts from the lichen. There are two arrows pointing to the mushroom. One
arrow starts from the bear sedge, and the other arrow starts from the lichen. Neither the bear sedge nor the
lichen has an arrow pointing to it. So, in this food web, matter does not move from the lichen to the mushroom.
Ground truth rationale: Use the arrows to follow how matter moves through this food web. For each answer
choice, try to find a path of arrows that starts from the lichen. No arrow points to the bilberry. So, in this food
web, matter does not move from the lichen to the bilberry.
A: The answer is (B) mushroom.

Q: Think about the magnetic force between the magnets in each pair. Which of the following statements is true?
Choices: (A) The magnitude of the magnetic force is the same in both pairs. (B) The magnitude of the magnetic
force is smaller in Pair 1. (C) The magnitude of the magnetic force is smaller in Pair 2.
Predicted rationale: The magnets in Pair 2 attract. The magnets in Pair 1 repel. But whether the magnets
attract or repel affects only the direction of the magnetic force. It does not affect the magnitude of the magnetic
force. Magnet sizes affect the magnitude of the magnetic force. Imagine magnets that are the same shape
and made of the same material. The smaller the magnets, the smaller the magnitude of the magnetic force
between them. Magnet A is the same size in both pairs. But Magnet B is smaller in Pair 2 than in Pair 1. So, the
magnitude of the magnetic force is smaller in Pair 2 than in Pair 1.
Ground truth rationale: Magnet sizes affect the magnitude of the magnetic force. Imagine magnets that are
the same shape and made of the same material. The smaller the magnets, the smaller the magnitude of the
magnetic force between them. Magnet A is the same size in both pairs. But Magnet B is smaller in Pair 2 than in
Pair 1. So, the magnitude of the magnetic force is smaller in Pair 2 than in Pair 1.
A: The answer is (C) The magnitude of the magnetic force is smaller in Pair 2.

Q: Which of the following contains a vague pronoun reference? Choices: (A) Abby was surprised when the
article said that at least one-third of American adults get less than seven hours of sleep each night. (B) Abby was
surprised when it said that at least one-third of American adults get less than seven hours of sleep each night.
Predicted rationale: The second answer choice contains a vague pronoun reference. The pronoun it could
refer to the article or the night. The first answer choice shows a possible correction for the vague pronoun
reference. It has been replaced with the article. Abby was surprised when the article said that at least one-third
of American adults get less than seven hours of sleep each night.
Ground truth rationale: The first answer choice contains a vague pronoun reference. The pronoun it is used
without its antecedent. The second answer choice shows a possible correction for the vague pronoun reference.
It has been replaced with the article. Abby was surprised when the article said that at least one-third of American
adults get less than seven hours of sleep each night.
A: The answer is (B) Abby was surprised when it said that at least one-third of American adults get less than
seven hours of sleep each night.

Table 10: Demonstrations from ECQA.
Q: Reading newspaper one of many ways to practice your what? Choices: (A) literacy (B) knowing how to read
(C) money (D) buying (E) money bank.
Predicted rationale: Reading newspaper is one of many ways to practice your literacy. Knowing how to read is
not practiced. Money is not practiced.Buying is not practiced. Money bank is not a way to practice.
Ground truth rationale: Literacy means competency. Reading newspaper provides daily new information to
oneself. One can maintain literacy with reading different information daily from newspaper. One cannot read
newspaper without knowing how to read. Reading newspaper does not help in achieving other options.
A: The answer is (A) literacy.

Q: If you are prone to postpone work what will you have to do in order to finish on time? Choices: (A) eat (B)
hasten (C) antedate (D) bring forward (E) advance.
Predicted rationale: If you are prone to postpone work, you will have to have to have a hasten in order to finish
on time. Eat is not true as it is not necessary to finish on time. Antidate is not true as it is not necessary to
finish on time. Bring forward is not true as it is not necessary to finish on time. Advance is not true as it is not
necessary to finish on time.
Ground truth rationale: If you have to complete the work on time then you have to speed-up. Antedating will do
work early than required, but not on time. Eating, bringing forward and working in advance are also not helpful to
do work on time.
A: The answer is (B) hasten.

Q: Aside from water and nourishment what does your dog need? Choices: (A) bone (B) charm (C) petted (D)
lots of attention (E) walked.
Predicted rationale: Bone is a solid surface of the body that is needed for growth, development, and
development. Bone is a part of the body and is not needed for growth, development, or development. Bone is
the part of the body and not the body part. Charm is a charm and not the body part. Petted is a human pet and
not a body part. Lots of attention is the amount of time and attention given to a dog and not the body part. Walk
is to walk and not the body part.
Ground truth rationale: Lots of attention is a special care or notice taken of someone or something, the
regarding of someone or something as interesting or important. Aside from water and nourishment, our dog
needs lots of attention. Bone is a treat that our dog will enjoy, and bone is nourishment and not what our dog
needs the most. Charm is a quality of fascinating others and our dog doesn˘2019t have to fascinate others.
Petted is to show affection and not a care that a dog requires. Walked is moved at a regular pace and that a dog
can do by his own and not what he needs from you.
A: The answer is (D) lots of attention.

Q: Where can you put a picture frame when it’s not hung vertically? Choices: (A) art show (B) wall (C) newspaper
(D) car (E) table.
Predicted rationale: Picture frames are hung vertically on the wall. Picture frames are not hung vertically on
the art show. Newspaper or table is not a place where a picture frame can be put. Car is not a place where a
picture frame can be put.
Ground truth rationale: Pictures frames are usually either hung on a wall or kept on a flat surface. A table has
a flat surface. Art show usually does not have pictures that are not hung on the wall. Wall is a vertical surface. It
is not possible to avoid hanging a picture vertically on a wall. Newspaper is an irrelevant option. Pictures are not
generally hung in a car.
A: The answer is (E) table.

Table 11: Demonstrations from LastLetter Task.
Q: immigrants, editorials, hierarchy
Predicted rationale: The last letter of the first word ’immigrants’ is’s’. The last letter of the second word
’editorials’ is ’s’. The last letter of the third word ’hierarchy’ is ’y’.
Extracted Answer: The answer is ssy. (Correct)
Directly predicted Answer: The answer is ssy. (Correct)
Ground Truth Answer: The answer is ssy.

Q: poison, dame, cornell
Predicted rationale: The last letter of the first word ’poison’ is ’n’. The last letter of the second word ’dame’ is
’e’. The last letter of the third word ’cornell’ is ’l’.
Extracted Answer: The answer is nel. (Correct)
Directly predicted Answer: The answer is nell. (Inorrect)
Ground Truth Answer: The answer is nel.

Q: departmental, dome, pressed, fascinating
Predicted rationale: The last letter of the first word ’departmental’ is ’l’. The last letter of the second word
’dome’ is ’e’. The last letter of the third word ’pressed’ is ’d’. The last letter of the forth word ’funny’ is ’y’ .
Extracted Answer: The answer is ledy. (Incorrect, the rationale part is wrong)
Directly predicted Answer: The answer is ledg. (Correct)
Ground Truth Answer: The answer is ledg.

Q: bahrain, joyce, calibration, ambien
Predicted rationale: The last letter of the first word ’bahrain’ is ’n’. The last letter of the second word ’joyce’ is
’e’. The last letter of the third word ’calendar’ is ’r’. The last letter of the forth word ’ambien’ is ’n’.
Extracted Answer: The answer is nern. (Incorrect, extraction part is wrong)
Directly predicted Answer: The answer is nenn. (Inorrect)
Ground Truth Answer: The answer is ssy.