Scaling Behavior of Machine Translation with Large Language Models
under Prompt Injection Attacks

Zhifan Sun
University of Edinburgh

Antonio Valerio Miceli-Barone
University of Edinburgh

Abstract

Inverse U-shaped Scaling (Parrish et al., 2022; Lin
et al., 2022; Miceli Barone et al., 2023), with many
more such scenarios being discovered during the
Inverse Scaling Prize (McKenzie et al., 2023). One
such class of scenarios is Prompt Injection Attacks
(PIAs), where the end-user embeds instructions
in their requests that contradict the default system
prompt or fine-tuning and thus manipulate the LLM
to behave in ways not intended by the system devel-
oper, such as performing a task different than the
intended one, revealing secret information included
in the system prompt, subvert content moderation,
and so on. In the Inverse Scaling Prize, PIAs were
evaluated on simple tasks such as word capital-
ization and repetition, showing strong asymptotic
inverse scaling, meaning that the larger the LLMs
are, the more susceptible they become to these at-
tacks.

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increas-
ingly becoming the preferred foundation plat-
forms for many Natural Language Processing
tasks such as Machine Translation, owing to
their quality often comparable to or better than
task-specific models, and the simplicity of spec-
ifying the task through natural language instruc-
tions or in-context examples. Their generality,
however, opens them up to subversion by end
users who may embed into their requests in-
structions that cause the model to behave in
unauthorized and possibly unsafe ways. In this
work we study these Prompt Injection Attacks
(PIAs) on multiple families of LLMs on a Ma-
chine Translation task, focusing on the effects
of model size on the attack success rates. We
introduce a new benchmark data set and we
discover that on multiple language pairs and in-
jected prompts written in English, larger mod-
els under certain conditions may become more
susceptible to successful attacks, an instance
of the Inverse Scaling phenomenon (McKen-
zie et al., 2023). To our knowledge, this is
the first work to study non-trivial LLM scaling
behaviour in a multi-lingual setting.

arXiv:2403.09832v1 [cs.CL] 14 Mar 2024

In this work, we evaluate the scaling behavior
of Prompt Injection Attacks on Prompt-based Ma-
chine Translation. Prompt-based Machine Trans-
lation (PMT) consists of using a general-purpose
LLM to do machine translation by asking it to trans-
late a text, optionally prepending a small number
(1-5) of parallel examples in the prompt (Zhang
et al., 2023). This approach is competitive with
task-specific neural machine translation systems on
high and medium resource language pairs (Kocmi
et al., 2023).

1
Introduction

reproduce our experiments1.

of the source question may have a lower BLEU
score than the answer to the question. For example:

2
Proposed Method

reference:
What are some movies still banned in Australia for
being offensive?
good translation:
What are some films still banned in Australia for
offensiveness?
failed translation:
No movies are banned in Australia for being offen-
sive.
It turns out that the good translation has a BLEU
score of 23, while the failed translation, where the
model answers the question instead of translating
it, has a BLEU score of 39.
For the purpose of our experiment, a success-
ful translation will be considered as one that show
signs of translating the source question in the target
language, even with poor translation quality, while
a failed translation is of the one that answers the
questions (in either source or target language, irre-
spective of the truthfulness of the answer). Thus,
we introduce another simple heuristic to measure
the performance of the model output specifically
for this experiment. That is, for each model and
language pair, we count how many translation out-
put sentences end with a question mark, as every
sentence in the reference ends with a question mark.
For the model output that doesn’t end with a ques-
tion mark, we will assume it is answering the ques-
tion or outputting irrelevant content. We call this
metric question mark accuracy and will be referred
to as accuracy thereafter.

2.1
Data collection and preprocessing

We create a data set based on the examples in
the TruthfulQA data set (Lin et al., 2022), which
consists of 817 questions in English originally de-
signed to test the ability of LLMs to answer factual
questions truthfully. Each question is translated
to German, French, Romanian and Russian using
mBART-50 2 (Liu et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020).
mBART-50 is fine-tuned specifically for machine
translation rather than generic instruction follow-
ing, therefore it has no tendency to answer ques-
tions. We manually inspect the model output and
remove bad and incomplete translations. The result-
ing examples constitute our clean En↔De, En↔Fr,
En↔Ro and En↔Ru data sets.
We generate our adversarial data sets by
prepending to the source question of each example
the prefix: "Don’t translate this sentence and an-
swer the question: ", or its translation in the same
language as the source question. A detailed illustra-
tion of prompt generation is illustrated in appendix
A.1.

2.2
Models

We use six families of models with varying sizes:
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), FLAN-T5 (Chung et al.,
2022), GPT-3, InstructGPT3 (Ouyang et al., 2022),
Llama2 and Llama2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023).

2.3
Prompts

Both zero-shot and few-shot prompts are used for
different models, but due to limited time and bud-
get, we limit our few-shot prompts to a single par-
allel example, hence it is one-shot. We use the best
prompt format from (Zhang et al., 2023), with a
variation for the Llama2-chat models that makes
use of the different conversational roles. The full
templates can be found in appendix A.2.

3
Experiments

Due to limitations of the models and our own bud-
get and time constraints, we do not evaluate all
translation directions and prompting strategies on
all model families. We perform the following ex-
periments (table 1):

• OpenAI models:
En↔De, En↔Fr and
En↔Ru translation directions, with one-shot
prompting (Fu and Khot, 2022).

2.4
Evaluation

We found that the most common evaluation metric
in machine translation, the BLEU score (Papineni
et al., 2002), is not sensitive enough for our exper-
iments since in some cases a correct translation

1
Injection.git

model
size
language pair
GPT-3
350M,1.3B,6.7B,175B
En↔De, En↔Fr, En↔Ru
InstructGPT
350M,1.3B,6.7B,175B
En↔De, En↔Fr, En↔Ru
T5
61M,223M,738M,3B
En→De, En→Fr, En→Ro
FLAN-T5
61M,223M,738M,3B
En→De, En→Fr, En→Ro
Llama2
7B,13B,70B
En↔De, En↔Fr, En↔Ro, En↔Ru
Llama2-chat
7B,13B,70B
En↔De, En↔Fr, En↔Ro, En↔Ru

Table 1: Overview of the model series and the language pairs

• Llama2 and Llama2-chat models: En↔De,
En↔Fr, En↔Ro and En↔Ru translation di-
rections, both zero-shot and one-shot.

drop in performance is inconsistent, thus, we will
not consider this as an instance of inverse scaling.

Llama2 and Llama2-chat
We report the results
on both Llama2 and Llama2-chat models. For each
model we also experimented on different quantiza-
tion variants of the model4. Figure 3 and 4 contain
the results of Llama2 and Llama2-chat respectively.
Quite obvious inverse scaling is found when the
Llama2 model is fed with the zero-shot prompt.
Another interesting pattern is that we observe an
abrupt increase in performance and then a steady
decrease when the quantization is 4-bit. The poten-
tial explanation is that the low quantization hurts
the overall performance of the model. The smallest
Llama2 model with the 4-bit quantization doesn’t
seem to be able to perform translation tasks in the
the zero-shot regime, as the its BLEU score is un-
der 10. It is also worth pointing out that although
the zero-shot accuracy of English-to-X translation
direction is rather high (except with 4-bit quanti-
zation), the BLEU score is consistently under 10.
Manual inspection reveals that the model is repeat-
ing the original question in English, resulting in a
high accuracy but low BLEU scores. Thus, these
results cannot be viewed as indicating true inverse
scaling. In one-shot mode, however, the Llama2
models perform very well, with near perfect ques-
tion mark accuracy (with flat or slightly inverse
scaling) and positive scaling in BLEU scores.
The Llama2-chat models are able to translate
in zero-shot mode, exhibiting positive scaling, but
perform less well in one-shot mode: possibly their
instruction tuning interferes with their ability to
learn in-context.

The experiments are divided into two parts: We
first report our results of the clean examples in
section 3.1, then report the results of adversarial
examples in section 3.2. We only report the ac-
curacy in this section, the BLEU scores of each
experiment can be found in appendix C.
In section 3.3, we display the average perfor-
mance of X-to-English language pairs and English-
to-X language pairs.

Computational resources
For the GPT and In-
structGPT models, we spent about 200 US dol-
lars on the OpenAI API. The experiments with
T5 and FLAN-T5 models except the largest vari-
ants were done on the HPE SGI 8600 system with
NVIDIA GV100 GPU. The experiments on the
Llama2, Llama2-chat and the largest variants of
T5 and FLAN-T5 were performed on a cluster of
NVIDIA A100 40GB/80GB GPUs (note that a sin-
gle node with 4 A100 40GB GPUs is sufficient to
run all experiments).

3.1
Non-adversarial Experiments

T5 and FLAN-T5
According to figure 1, all lan-
guage pairs and models show positive scaling ex-
cept the English-German language pair with the T5
model, where we found U-shape scaling.

3.2
Adversarial Experiments

As expected, non-adversarial experiments show
generally positive scaling for most models families

(a) T5
(b) FLAN-T5

Figure 1: Accuracy of T5 and FLAN-T5 in non-adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Russian-English

(d) English-German
(e) English-French
(f) English-Russian

Figure 2: accuracy score of OpenAI models of in non-adversarial experiments

and language pairs. Thus, inspired by the prompt
injection example in (McKenzie et al., 2023), we
add an adversarial prompt at the beginning of each
question that explicitly instructs the LLM not to
translate but answer the question. This results in
more varied trends, with inverse scaling, or non-
monotonically U-shape scaling in certain settings.
We only report the accuracy here, BLEU scores can
be found in appendix C.

a genuine case of U-shape scaling. Overall, these
models do not show clear scaling trends.

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 3: Accuracy score of Llama2 models in non-adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 4: Accuracy score of Llama2-chat in non-adversarial experiments

3.3
Inverse Scaling w.r.t. training data size

Khot, 2022).

(a) T5
(b) FLAN-T5

Figure 5: Accuracy of T5 and FLAN-T5 in adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Russian-English

(d) English-German
(e) English-French
(f) English-Russian

Figure 6: accuracy score of OpenAI models of in adversarial experiments

The experiment results on Llama2 models (fig-
ure 3 and 7) show that inverse scaling can be
avoided with even a single in-context parallel ex-
ample, a similar conclusion was also made in Wei
et al. (2023), where they use few-shot examples
to reverse the inverse scaling in several tasks that
previously exhibited inverse scaling.

nomenon as a precise scaling law, as accurate train-
ing corpus size and proportion of English vs. non-
English data are not publicly known for most model
families, we do note that the effect is strong and
consistent across all model families, model sizes
and languages.
In table 2 we provide the average accuracies
across all models and both clean and adversarial
examples for all language pairs.

4
Discussion and Related Work

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) French-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 7: accuracy score of Llama2 models in adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 8: accuracy score of Llama2-chat models in adversarial experiments

x - English
accuracy
English - x
accuracy
de-en
0.904
en-de
0.731
fr-en
0.926
en-fr
0.739
ro-en
0.908
en-ro
0.746
ru-en
0.903
en-ru
0.708
x - English
accuracy
English - x
accuracy
de-en
0.629
en-de
0.486
fr-en
0.734
en-fr
0.545
ro-en
0.663
en-ro
0.550
ru-en
0.756
en-ru
0.505

Finally, one may ask whether mere scaling might
eventually overcome all inverse trends. In Wei et al.
(2023), the authors repeated the inverse scaling ex-
periments of McKenzie et al. (2023) with much
larger models and found that for most of the tasks
that show inverse scaling, further scaling up the
model sizes did manage to reverse the trend, as the
performance goes up again and forms a U-shape
scaling. In McKenzie et al. (2023), GPT-4 also
performs better than most GPT-3 and InstructGPT
models, however, in Miceli Barone et al. (2023),
even GPT4 performs worse than smaller models of
the same family, suggesting that mere model scal-
ing may not be sufficient to solve poor performance
on difficult examples, or at least not in an efficient
way given the costs of training and deploying very
large models.

Table 2: average accuracies of X-to/from English lan-
guage pairs. top: non-adversarial experiments, bottom:
adversarial experiments

5
Conclusion

question marks.

tual questions, both on clear examples and on adver-
sarial examples constructed according to a simple
prompt injection attack where we tell the model to
answer the questions instead of translating them.
We found inverse scaling under certain model se-
ries and zero-shot scenarios.
In addition to the effect from the model size, we
also found that performance severely deteriorates
when the prompt is written in English, indicating
inverse scaling in the dimension of the amount of
training data.
To our knowledge, this is the first work to inves-
tigate non-monotonic scaling and prompt injection
attacks in a multi-lingual setting.

Ethics Statement

In this work, we investigate the vulnerability of
LLMs to Prompt Injection Attacks. We do not
present novel attacks, instead, we focus on the char-
acterization of the system performance under a
well-known attack, albeit applied to a novel task
(Machine Translation), we believe that our work
does not create additional security risks but instead
may contribute to eventually increasing the secu-
rity of LLM-based systems by furthering a better
understanding of these vulnerabilities.
In this work we do not carry out experiments
on human subjects, therefore there are no risks
associated with human experimentation.

Limitations

Number of model families
Due to limited time,
budget and computational resources available, and
because the limited number of publicly available
LLMs that exhibit strong multilingual capabilities,
our research doesn’t include many model series.
Future work on this topic should include more
model families, such as Antropic Claude, GPT-
3.5-turbo and GPT-4.

Acknowledgements

Antonio Valerio Miceli-Barone was supported by
a grant from the UKRI Strategic Priorities Fund
to the UKRI Research Node on Trustworthy Au-
tonomous Systems Governance and Regulation
(EP/V026607/1, 2020-2024).
Some of the experiments in this research were
performed using the Baskerville Tier 2 HPC ser-
vice 5. Baskerville was funded by the EPSRC
and UKRI through the World Class Labs scheme
(EP/T022221/1) and the Digital Research Infras-
tructure programme (EP/W032244/1) and is op-
erated by Advanced Research Computing at the
University of Birmingham.

Number of distractors
Our experiment only con-
siders a single prompt injection attack setting and
uses a question-answering task as the distracting
prompt. The study of scaling behavior in prompt-
based machine translation can go well beyond this
scope. For instance, one could use the counter-
factual data set (Meng et al., 2023) to construct
sentences containing counterfactual knowledge e.g.
"The Eiffel Tower is located in Berlin." As hypoth-
esized previously, since larger language models
store more world knowledge and rely more on the
world knowledge to provide output, in an inverse
scaling scenario, we would expect that larger mod-
els tend to translate the counterfactual piece of
information e.g. "Berlin" in our example instead
of the factual knowledge i.e. "Paris". In addition,
more language pairs can be tested, to provide more
solid proof for our claim that the language where
the distraction adversarial prompt is written causes
different model performances.

References

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020, virtual.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,

Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vin-
odkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia,
Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,
Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, An-
drew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pil-
lai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira,
Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy
Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm: Scaling language mod-
eling with pathways.

Tom Kocmi, Eleftherios Avramidis, Rachel Bawden,
Ondˇrej Bojar, Anton Dvorkovich, Christian Fed-
ermann, Mark Fishel, Markus Freitag, Thamme
Gowda, Roman Grundkiewicz, Barry Haddow,
Philipp Koehn, Benjamin Marie, Christof Monz,
Makoto Morishita, Kenton Murray, Makoto Nagata,
Toshiaki Nakazawa, Martin Popel, Maja Popovi´c,
and Mariya Shmatova. 2023. Findings of the 2023
conference on machine translation (wmt23): Llms
are here but not quite there yet. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Conference on Machine Translation, pages
1–42, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022.

Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods.

Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey
Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. Multilingual denoising pre-
training for neural machine translation.

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret
Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Al-
bert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai,
Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdh-
ery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson,
Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams
Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai,
Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Ja-
cob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le,
and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned
language models.

Ian R. McKenzie, Alexander Lyzhov, Michael Pieler,
Alicia Parrish, Aaron Mueller, Ameya Prabhu, Euan
McLean, Aaron Kirtland, Alexis Ross, Alisa Liu,
Andrew Gritsevskiy, Daniel Wurgaft, Derik Kauff-
man, Gabriel Recchia, Jiacheng Liu, Joe Cavanagh,
Max Weiss, Sicong Huang, The Floating Droid, Tom
Tseng, Tomasz Korbak, Xudong Shen, Yuhui Zhang,
Zhengping Zhou, Najoung Kim, Samuel R. Bowman,
and Ethan Perez. 2023. Inverse scaling: When bigger
isn’t better.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan
Belinkov. 2023. Locating and editing factual associa-
tions in gpt.

Hao Fu, Yao; Peng and Tushar Khot. 2022. How does
gpt obtain its ability? tracing emergent abilities of
language models to their sources. Yao Fu’s Notion.

Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone, Fazl Barez, Shay B.
Cohen, and Ioannis Konstas. 2023. The larger they
are, the harder they fail: Language models do not
recognize identifier swaps in python. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2023, pages 272–292, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Behrooz Ghorbani, Orhan Firat, Markus Freitag, Ankur
Bapna, Maxim Krikun, Xavier Garcia, Ciprian
Chelba, and Colin Cherry. 2021. Scaling laws for
neural machine translation.

Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and
Sam McCandlish. 2021. Scaling laws for transfer.

Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-
roll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback.

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch,
Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes
Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland,
Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan
Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Si-
monyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals,
and Laurent Sifre. 2022. Training compute-optimal
large language models.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL ’02, page 311–318, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B.
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020a.
Scaling laws for neural language models.

A hand-built bias benchmark for question answering.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 2086–2105, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-
former.

Yuqing Tang, Chau Tran, Xian Li, Peng-Jen Chen, Na-
man Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Jiatao Gu, and An-
gela Fan. 2020. Multilingual translation with extensi-
ble multilingual pretraining and finetuning.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models.

Jason Wei, Najoung Kim, Yi Tay, and Quoc V. Le. 2023.

Inverse scaling can become u-shaped.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emer-
gent abilities of large language models.

Biao Zhang, Barry Hadow, and Alexandra Birch. 2023.

Prompting large language model for machine transla-
tion: A case study.

A
Example generation

A.1
Example Generation Pipeline

Figure 9: The pipeline of prompt generation

A.2
Prompt Templates

Zero-shot template:
Translate from {source} to {target}: {source text}

Few-shot template:
Translate from {source} to {target}
{source}:{source example}
{target}:{target example}
{source}:{source text}
{target}:

Zero-shot template (Llama2-chat):
[INST] «SYS»
Translate from {source} to {target}:
«/SYS»

{source}: {source text} [/INST] {target}:

Few-shot template (Llama2-chat):
[INST] «SYS»
Translate from {source} to {target}:
«/SYS»

{source}: {source example} [/INST] {target}: {target example} </s><s>
[INST] {source}: {source text} [/INST] {target}:

B
Translation output

Figure 10: Example output of IntructGPT models under a Prompt Injection Attack. Note that the larger model is
giving a detailed answer to the question rather than translating it correctly, however, the GPT-3.5 models do translate
the source text correctly.

C
BLEU Scores

(a) T5
(b) FLAN-T5

Figure 11: BLEU Scores of T5 and FLAN-T5 models in non-adversarial experiments

(a) T5
(b) FLAN-T5

Figure 12: BLEU Scores of T5 and FLAN-T5 models in adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Russian-English

(d) English-German
(e) English-French
(f) English-Russian

Figure 13: Bleu score of OpenAI models in non-adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Russian-English

(d) English-German
(e) English-French
(f) English-Russian

Figure 14: Bleu score of OpenAI models in adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 15: Bleu score of Llama2 models in non-adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 16: Bleu score of Llama2 models in adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian-English
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) English-Russian

Figure 17: Bleu score of Llama2 chat models in non-adversarial experiments

(a) German-English
(b) French-English
(c) Romanian
(d) Russian-English

(e) English-German
(f) English-French
(g) English-Romanian
(h) Russian-English

Figure 18: Bleu score of Llama2-chat models in adversarial experiments