Software Engineering for Collective Cyber-Physical Ecosystems

Roberto Casadei
Università di Bologna
Cesena, Italy

Gianluca Aguzzi
Università di Bologna
Cesena, Italy

Giorgio Audrito
Università di Torino
Turin, Italy

Ferruccio Damiani
Università di Torino
Turin, Italy

Danilo Pianini
Università di Bologna
Cesena, Italy

Giordano Scarso
Università di Torino
Turin, Italy

arXiv:2406.04780v1 [cs.SE] 7 Jun 2024

Gianluca Torta
Università di Torino
Turin, Italy

Mirko Viroli
Università di Bologna
Cesena, Italy

1
INTRODUCTION

ABSTRACT

Today’s distributed and pervasive computing addresses large-scale
cyber-physical ecosystems, characterised by dense and large net-
works of devices capable of computation, communication and in-
teraction with the environment and people. While most research
focusses on treating these systems as “composites” (i.e., heteroge-
neous functional complexes), recent developments in fields such
as self-organising systems and swarm robotics have opened up a
complementary perspective: treating systems as “collectives” (i.e.,
uniform, collaborative, and self-organising groups of entities). This
article explores the motivations, state of the art, and implications
of this “collective computing paradigm” in software engineering,
discusses its peculiar challenges, and outlines a path for future
research, touching on aspects such as macroprogramming, collec-
tive intelligence, self-adaptive middleware, learning, synthesis and
experimentation of collective behaviour.

Technological advances in computing systems and networking and
trends like pervasive computing [41] and the Internet of Things
(IoT) [81], promote an increasing digitalisation of our world, which
is being filled with interconnected computing devices supporting a
variety of services and applications. In this work, we are concerned
with the general high-level problem of how to unleash the potential
of large-scale distributed systems [130] by proper engineering of the
software managing them or driving their overall behaviour.
Specifically, in this paper, we focus on collective cyber-physical
ecosystems (CCPEs). By cyber-physical, we indicate that systems
consist of situated computing devices able to sense and/or act in
the physical environment; without neglecting that systems may
also comprise non-situated and infrastructural devices (e.g., edge
servers, the cloud, etc.). By ecosystem, we mean that devices live
and interact with each other within the environment, functioning
as an “ecological unit”, i.e., interacting to provide functionalities
in a long-term equilibrium; in particular, we consider both short-
and long-lived tasks which may require cooperation and must
adapt to perturbations. By collective, we mean that multiple de-
vices can be regarded as a whole, solving distributed tasks through
computational collective intelligence (CCI) [30, 65, 86]. Examples of
CCPEs include robotic swarms [23], smart cities [47], edge-cloud
infrastructures [142], and crowds of people with wearables [53].
In the research landscape of software engineering (SE) for CCPEs,
mainstream approaches – like (micro-)services, programming
frameworks, and artificial intelligence – are typically applied under
a view of “systems as composites”; in this view, a system is built as the
integration of heterogeneous components, which can be engineered
largely independently of the others. Recently, results from niches of
several research threads – like collective adaptive systems [97], self-
adaptive software [136], macro-programming [31, 74], and swarm
robotics [23] – promoted the complementary view of “systems as col-
lectives”. In this view, a system is engineered “as a whole”, adopting
(declarative) abstractions, tools, and methods suitable to coordinat-
ing groups of interacting devices, letting their CCI emerge.
In this paper, we address the impact of adopting a collective
stance in software engineering for large-scale distributed systems,

CCS CONCEPTS

• Software and its engineering →Software development
methods; System description languages; Software organiza-
tion and properties; • Human-centered computing →Collab-
orative and social computing; • Computing methodologies;

KEYWORDS

cyber-physical ecosystems, collective adaptive systems, swarm in-
telligence, macroprogramming, edge-cloud continuum

ACM Reference Format:
Roberto Casadei, Gianluca Aguzzi, Giorgio Audrito, Ferruccio Damiani,
Danilo Pianini, Giordano Scarso, Gianluca Torta, and Mirko Viroli. 2024. Soft-
ware Engineering for Collective Cyber-Physical Ecosystems . In Proceedings
of International Workshop on Software Engineering in 2030 (SE 2030). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.

SE 2030, November 2024, Puerto Galinàs (Brazil)
2024. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM

considering CCPEs as main target and artificial CCI as main goal.
To this end, we provide a review of the state of the art on CCPE
engineering, emphasising the different approaches involved and
then highlight key challenges that we expect may contribute to the
research and development of SE.
The rest of the manuscript is structured as follows. Section 2
details on the motivation for the emerging of the “system as collec-
tives” perspective in software engineering. Section 3 reports on the
state of the art on CCPE engineering, and its main themes. Then,
in Section 4, we highlight relevant challenges fostering research in
software engineering for CCPEs. Finally, Section 5 offers a wrap-up.

the specification of requirements, often relaxed to deal with un-
certainty, and meta-requirements about the self-adaptation itself;
control-based approaches leverage control theory to formally de-
sign and analyse the self-adaptation logic; and learning-based ap-
proaches exploit machine learning to synthesise accurate models
and plans.
In decentralised self-adaptive systems, adaptation control is dis-
tributed among different components equipped with feedback loops.
This is similar but often distinguished from self-organising sys-
tems [20, 147], which generally consist of a larger number of simpler
components that seek system goals by repeated local interaction.
Engineering self-organisation is a matter of identifying mechanisms
and techniques to steer or guide the emergent behaviour of groups
of interacting agents [114, 147].

2
SYSTEMS AS COLLECTIVES

In this section, we detail on the motivation for a collective viewpoint
in software engineering for large-scale distributed ecosystems.

2.3
From composites to collectives

2.1
Context and high-level challenges

At this point, we deem useful to distinguish between two related
but distinct kinds of possible target systems, where a system is
generally meant, coherently with systems theories [89], as a plu-
rality of entities considered together within an arbitrary bound-
ary. In particular, we are inspired by the ontological distinction
between composites and collectives in Masolo et al. [88]. A com-
posite, a.k.a. an assembly or complex, consists of different kinds of
components, thus exhibiting substantial heterogeneity, organised
in a recursively decomposable functional structure with multiple
roles. A distinct but related and non-disjoint notion is that of a
collective, which is a more homogeneous set of entities related by
some non-transitive membership relationship. Roughly, then, ex-
amples of composites include the distributed software modules
that collaboratively operate a manufacturing machine, or a team of
agents with significantly different capabilities interacting following
a complex protocol; whereas a swarm of similar robots, a cluster,
or a sensor network are exemplars of collectives. Research in fields
such as swarm robotics [23], collective adaptive systems [97], and
artificial life [23, 58] shows peculiar traits of collectives, motivating
new approaches to their engineering. Abowd [2] refers to collective
computing as the fourth revolution after the mainframe, personal,
and ubiquitous computing revolutions. Indeed, the collective intel-
ligence [65, 120] emerging from the collaboration of humans and
technologies has the potential to overcome important societal chal-
lenges [121]. Even when humans are not an active part of a solution,
the engineering of artificial collectives [30] can contribute by im-
proving existing applications (e.g., through increased autonomy and
resilience), unlocking novel ones (cf. drone crowdsourcing [10] and
IoT-as-a-Service [69]), or sustaining the autonomous operation of
large ecosystems in smart infrastructures and smart cities [47, 105].
The interest in large-scale CCPEs is mounting. In these systems,
besides the local services and tasks (often resulting from complex
networks of collaboration), there is increasing interest in global-level
services (e.g., surveillance, waste collection, task allocation, group
coordination) and global-level properties (e.g., overall energy con-
sumption, system-level resilience). Accordingly, several research ef-
forts are noticing fundamental gaps in software engineering for these
systems and consequently foster the collective viewpoint in system
analysis, design, and implementation, with collectives and collec-
tive phenomena [140] as first-class citizens [31, 72, 74, 93]. In the

Engineering pervasive and cyber-physical (eco-)systems is chal-
lenging [16, 24]. Indeed, many challenges have to be addressed,
including the implications of distribution (cf., lack of global clock,
multiple administrative domains, dynamic topologies, latency and
cost of communication, failure, inconsistency, security) [124], the in-
tegration of discrete and continuous dynamics [35], the implications
of large scale deployments [100], and the design of collaborative logic
(cf. Section 3). For instance, addressing large scale typically requires
the design of decentralised solutions to avoid single points of failure
and performance bottlenecks. To deal with different requirements in
terms of latency, cost, and performance, deployments often target
multiple layers of the edge-cloud continuum (ECC) [142]. Also, since
large-scale deployments complicate maintenance, the design should
involve autonomic capabilities [77], endowing systems with some
adaptation or self-* properties (e.g., self-organisation [58, 147], self-
reconfiguration [42], self-improvement and self-integration [17]).

2.2
SE approaches for distributed systems

The majority of current solutions for distributed software design
leverage (micro-)services [49], stream processing [46], or event-
driven platforms [38]. These techniques are suitable also for CCPEs,
though challenges related to heterogeneity, deployment, efficiency,
integration, and security are hindering their adoption in specific
domains like manufacturing [142]. General approaches to service
composition [79, 104] include orchestration by (possibly multiple)
centralised entities [131] or choreographies for decentralised inter-
action protocols [90]. An interesting related SE practice is the use of
architectural description languages [103] describing the components
and constraints of an entire distributed system, and its specification
in a single codebase—cf. multi-tier programming [135].
Concerning self-adaptive software systems [136], there are mul-
tiple classes of self-adaptation approaches. The reference model
for self-adaptive systems [77] distinguishes between the manag-
ing and the managed system, and generally organises a feedback
loop around the MAPE-K (Monitor, Analyse, Plan, Execute - Knowl-
edge) components within the managing system. Upon this basis,
architecture-based approaches emphasise runtime reasoning about
architectural models; requirements-based approaches emphasise

(Macro-observables)
Functions of individual
outcomes and the environment

next sections, we detail on these contributions, further motivating
interesting developments and challenges in software engineering.

Macro

Level

Emergence
Downward

3
SE FOR CCPEs: OVERVIEW

causation

In this section, we discuss the main issues encountered when engi-
neering CCPEs, and then provide a view of the state of the art.

3.1
Main Themes in SE for CCPEs

Micro
Level

Global

3.1.1
Local-to-global and global-to-local mapping problems. When
dealing with CCPEs, there are two main issues [15, 30, 129].
The local-to-global mapping problem, also known as the forward
or prediction problem, entails determining what will be the global
outcome out of an execution of the local behaviours making up
the system, for a given set of environment dynamics. Indeed, in
the traditional “node-centric” engineering viewpoint, the program-
mer thinks about how the behaviour of an individual agent will
affect other agents and its surrounding environment. However,
to determine the global or system-level result, the behaviour of
other agents and the environment have to be considered as well,
resulting in a complex network of causes and effects, often leading
to emergent phenomena. In emergence, it is difficult to trace the
micro-level causes that led to a given macro-level observable. In
other words, emergence makes prediction difficult or impossible:
the general solution consists of “running the system”, i.e., seeing
where the chain of events and the historical contingencies lead the
system. This makes simulation an invaluable tool for studying and
analysing collective behaviour.
The global-to-local mapping problem, also known as the inverse
or engineering problem, entails determining, from a global outcome
(target state), what local behaviours will conduct to it and how.
Clearly the two problems are related, as two sides of the same coin.
Other names for these problems and corresponding solutions
are also micro-to-macro and macro-to-micro, respectively [31, 115,
148]. It is relevant to introduce this terminology because several
research threads do use these terms, and in our integrative effort
we aim at removing fictitious linguistic barriers. Indeed, in multi-
agent systems, it is frequent to talk about the micro-level of agent
activity and the macro-level of agent societies/organisations [115,
141], and the research thread of macro-programming [31, 74] is
exactly where the forward and inverse problems are addressed by
using programming languages. Figure 1 depicts the general idea
graphically, where macro-observables are abstracted as functions
of the inputs from the individuals and environment, as in [65, 99].
In the traditional “node-centric” engineering viewpoint, there is
an implicit global-to-local solution that is limited to the designer’s
mind or at the requirements phase. In this paper, we analyze how
recent research [15, 23, 31, 72, 74, 92, 97, 106] shows that design
can start from the “global” perspective, ideally with declarative
definitions that represent the intended global behaviour, then im-
plementing local behaviours by a formal global-to-local mapping
technique, and finally going forward for proper testing and valida-
tion with a local-to-global mapping technique.

Level

Local
Level

Figure 1: The local/micro and global/macro levels of systems.
The shapes at the top are just abstract denotations of macro-
scopic information obtained by an application-specific, ab-
stracted function of the microscopic data taken from the
agents and environment (cf. [59, 65]). The stylised agents are
not necessarily people but also artificial autonomous agents.

Automated design methods [26] work at the meta-level of algo-
rithms, defining procedures for learning or synthesis of the control
programs driving (the individual agents of) CCPEs. Prominent ex-
amples of this family are evolutionary methods [127], multi-agent
reinforcement learning [28], and program synthesis [62].
Manual or behaviour-based design methods, instead, include the
classical programming activity, where the programmer follows trial-
and-error processes to craft algorithms using general-purpose or
domain-specific languages. When addressing collective behaviour,
this is also referred to as macro-programming [31] (discussed more
deeply in Section 3.2.2).
Note that, being automated design the meta-level application
of manual design, these two classes are not necessarily disjoint:
indeed, key research opportunities lies in this overlap [6, 7, 37, 144].

3.1.3
Understanding and building “collective intelligence”. Collective
intelligence (CI) can be generally intended as the property of groups
of individuals behaving in ways that seem intelligent [86]. This
definition reuses possible definitions of “intelligence”, typically as a
collection of task-specific skills or, in a stronger sense, as a general
problem-solving and learning ability [39]. So, a CCPE is intelligent
if it is able to solve tasks in a variety of environments, possibly
adapting itself to cope with new problems.
Remark that the term “collective intelligence” leads to two main
related areas: socio-technical systems [120] and artificial collec-
tives [30]. The former emphasises the complex collaboration of
humans and technologies, whereas the latter emphasises the en-
gineering of multi-agent systems consisting primarily of artificial
devices. The two research areas are related, and humans are indeed
considered in the latter kind of systems as well, but the problems
addressed are quite different (roughly, more human-computer inter-
action on one hand, and more behaviour control design on the other
hand). Since socio-technical systems tend to feature increased com-
plexity of agents and heterogeneity, hence leading to composites,
in this work we mainly focus on artificial collectives. We explicitly

3.1.2
Automatic vs. manual design. Various works in the context
of multi-agent systems and swarm robotics suggest that techniques
for the design of collective behaviour can be classified in two main
categories [23]: automated techniques and manual techniques.

refer to the interpretation of CI as computational collective intelli-
gence (CCI) [30, 123], meaning the intelligence globally exhibited
by groups of computing devices.

In particular, certain macro-programming approaches do expose
collective-level abstractions, and programs can be read as instruc-
tions targetting not an individual device, but rather a collective
of devices, hence the computing machine is conceptually the whole
distributed system of computers. Achieving that, often entails some
forms of declarativity at the language level, a compilation of local
programs from the global specification (cf. [135]), and a non-trivial
interplay between the local/global programs and the middleware
(cf. Section 4.2).
For a detailed picture of the state of the art on macroprogram-
ming, the reader can refer to these two recent surveys [31, 74]. It
should be noticed that the surveys do not cover research contri-
butions that are rather focussed on smaller-scale heterogeneous
systems, i.e., composites, and hence captured by the related fields
of choreographic programming [43], multi-agent oriented program-
ming [19], architectural description languages [85], and multi-tier
programming [135].

3.2
State of the Art in SE for CCPEs

It follows a non-exhaustive review of contributions to SE for CCPEs,
aiming at illustrating its main problems, methods, and techniques.

3.2.1
Learning/evolving collective behaviour. The automatic ap-
proach in CCPEs design has been a focal area for over 20 years,
encompassing various fields such as swarm robotics [23], traffic
management, and crowd engineering. In this area, two main ap-
proaches have been studied: evolutionary approaches [127] and
reinforcement learning (RL) [122]. Both rely heavily on simulation
to provide necessary feedback for refining generated controllers.
Evolutionary approaches draw inspiration from natural evolution,
starting with a set of controllers that evolve based on simulation
feedback. The design of a controller is highly dependent on the
scenario and desired complexity, using finite state machines [57],
neural networks [54], and Boolean networks [22]. The state of the
art in this research area is attributed to AuToMoDe [56], a general
framework for generating controllers for robot swarms.
In the realm of collective RL [80], initial efforts, such as those by
COIN [139], focused on bottom-up CCI, aiming to enable multiple
agents to learn concurrently via RL. These early efforts evolved
towards prioritizing the collective as a primary entity, thus shift-
ing focus to designing individual agent controllers. For instance,
a novel model named swarMDP [118] was introduced to simplify
the modelling of learning processes for swarm-like systems, char-
acterised by homogeneous entities (same controller) with a partial
observability of the environment. This model represents an initial
top-down approach, where the controller, possessing a global view,
is then distributed into similar controllers for individual robots.
In the state of the art, there are two main strategies. One strat-
egy, aimed at collaborative systems with few agents and exempli-
fied by COMA [55] and MAPPO [149], addresses the individual
behaviour of agents that cooperate to achieve collective intelli-
gence. Another strategy, targetting more large-scale systems, let
collective behaviour emerge through a uniform controller, akin
to swarMDP but leveraging more recent models like mean-field
games [145]—this is often known as many-agent reinforcement
learning [143]. In the centralised training and decentralised execution
approach [61, 78], controllers are derived from a global perspective
and then distributed throughout the system. This methodology
simplifies the learning of collective behaviours and allows for the
verification of outcomes during simulation.

3.2.3
Aggregate Computing. Aggregate computing is a prominent
macroprogramming approach for CCPEs [134], developed for more
than ten years. We briefly recall its fundamental features: bio-
inspiration, formality, pragmatism, compositionality, deployment-
independence.
Generally speaking, a major general theme in software en-
gineering for CCPEs is finding ways to map scientific theories
about natural phenomena to software engineering constructs (e.g.,
programming abstractions or platforms)—cf. bio-inspired mecha-
nisms [51]. In the case of aggregate computing, the mechanism of
self-organisation [58] is reflected in the execution model (imple-
mented in the runtime or middleware) of programs written in this
paradigm, which assumes that each device computes in repeated
asynchronous sense–compute–interact rounds.
The programming paradigm is formally founded on field cal-
culi [14], functional core languages for expressing manipulations
of computational fields: distributed data structures mapping sets
of devices to values, hence denoting collective inputs and outputs.
This enables deriving guarantees and proofs about programs, e.g.
to assess that a collective computation is self-stabilising (roughly,
eventually converging to the “right” value) [133].
These calculi are implemented by standalone or embedded
domain-specific languages (DSLs) [134], also providing pragmatic
libraries of reusable functions capturing recurrent patterns of col-
lective behaviour. Using these languages and libraries, the program-
mer defines a single program expressing the whole behaviour of a
collective as a composition of building blocks.
Then, the program can be deployed on a network of devices,
using a simulator or leveraging a proper middleware support on real
systems [32]. By distinguishing the logical model of the system from
its physical deployment, it is also possible to partition an application
into deployable components and hence offload computations across
the edge-cloud continuum [32].

3.2.2
Macroprogramming. Macroprogramming is the umbrella
term that gathers programming solutions for defining and exe-
cuting the macroscopic behaviour of software systems [31, 74]. The
definition is voluntarily broad, since it mostly serves as a basis
for integrating and finding commonalities among different solu-
tions for similar problems recurring in disparate domains, from
wireless sensor networks [92, 95] and parallel computing [126]
to swarm robotics [106] and software-defined networks [75]. So,
the real question is not whether a programming solution is an in-
stance of macroprogramming but rather to what extent it is so [31].

3.2.4
Models, Methods, and Tools for CCPEs. A few works provide
early contributions addressing (parts of) the development life-cycle
for CCPEs, mainly from the research area of collective adaptive
systems [97]. Actually, the majority of these, briefly reviewed in
the following, lie at the intersection of composites and collectives.

There is a number of contributions about the use of formal meth-
ods for the specification and quantitative evaluation of collective
adaptive systems [18]. One example is CARMA (Collective Adaptive
Resource-sharing Markovian Agents) [83], a stochastic process alge-
bra supporting the modelling and verification, through a stochastic
simulator, of quantitative properties of collective behaviour like
performance, availability, dependability.
Another major source of contributions was the ASCENS (Auto-
nomic Service-Component ENSembles) project [137]. This project
proposed approaches and formal languages for the specification and
analysis of ensembles, namely dynamic groups of devices exhibiting
complex interactions and working in complex environments [138].
In the SOTA (State Of The Affairs) and GEM (General Ensemble
Model) approach [1], collective behaviour is denoted as a trajectory
in a state space where each point denotes a single “state of the
affairs” comprising all the information about the ensemble and its
environment. Regarding the programming of ensembles, ASCENS
features the SCEL (Service Component Ensemble Language) [98], a
process-algebraic abstract language for specifying behaviour of indi-
vidual entities, of aggregations of entities, based on attribute-based
communication [9], and in a way that is parametric to knowledge
repositories and adaptation policies.
A related approach to engineering dynamic ensembles is pro-
vided by Bucchiarone et al. [25], based on domain objects encapsu-
lating behavioural processes and exporting process fragments for
refinement and composition. These networks of domain objects
(i.e., ensembles) can be modelled using typed graph grammars [68].
A programming framework for hybrid collaborative systems is
proposed by Scekic et al. [116]. There, collectives are teams of peers
(abstracting humans and machines) performing “collective-based
tasks”, e.g. in crowdsourcing settings. The approach, based on the
SmartSociety framework [116], provides a Java-based platform and
Application Program Interface (API) for the orchestration of such
hybrid ensembles, supporting managed collectives, collective task
management, adaptation policies (expressed in terms of changing
handlers attached to task transitions), as well as other services for
communication and incentive management. The interesting part of
the approach is the combination of collectiveness (where collectives
are the first-class citizens managed by the platform) and human
orchestration, and the positioning of the contribution roughly half-
way between composites and collectives engineering; however the
approach is quite ad-hoc and with limited methodological guidance.
There are other approaches similar to SCEL, domain objects, and
SmartSociety that share some of their motivation and abstractions,
and provide related DSLs and platforms supporting modelling, im-
plementation, and limited forms of verification. These include, e.g.,
DEECo (Distributed Emergent Ensembles of Components) [27].
Generally, any approach like aggregate computing, CARMA, or
ASCENS comes with its own toolchain, but there exist also “stan-
dalone” tools. One toolkit for reasoning about collective adaptive
systems is Sibilla [60]. It is a modular framework supporting multi-
ple specification languages (e.g., for interactive objects, population
models, and agent-based systems), organised with a three-layer
architecture comprising: (i) a back-end supporting modelling, sim-
ulation, and analysis; (ii) different front-ends (APIs and shells), and
(iii) a runtime system coordinating activities.

3.2.5
Methodologies for CCPEs. The aforementioned SOTA and
GEM models promote goal-oriented [70] adaptation requirements
engineering. However, there are also studies on specific properties
of CCPEs or peculiar aspects of their engineering.
In [8], a systematic review is carried out studying how existing
approaches deal with uncertainty and adaptation in CCPEs. Also,
a design guide is proposed for uncertainty-aware components in
CCPEs, highlighting the need of identifying uncertainty sources
(e.g., failure, delays, noise, missing information) and “border situ-
ations” to feed methods for handling uncertainties (e.g., humans-
in-the-loop, reconfiguration, and declarative behaviour) before per-
forming the adaptation decision-making.
Regarding engineering self-organisation and emergence, there
exist some ideas and high-level guidelines [99, 108]. For instance,
Nöel and Zambonelli [99] contrast with approaches based on micro-
level design and rather suggest to focus on the macro-level: “the
global behaviour must emerge, exploiting self-organisation imposes
some design constraints and decomposition plays an important role in
what can emerge”. In particular, they delineate two different decom-
position strategies: organisation-based (by distinguishing roles) and
functionality-based (by breaking global tasks into global sub-tasks).
In the former strategy, literature on multi-agent organisational
paradigms is especially relevant [71].

4
SE CHALLENGES FOR CCPEs

In Section 3 we provided an overview of works contributing to the
engineering of CCPEs. At their core, there are notations and tools
supporting automatic and/or manual approaches helping to bridge
the intended global behaviour with the local control program of
the agents of the CCPE at hand. The general goal is promoting
forms of collective intelligence out of whole networks of devices.
The key insight is that several research works [15, 23, 31, 72, 74, 92,
97, 106] witness the need of embracing the collective viewpoint,
possibly throughout the software engineering process [97, 137]: cf.
requirements expressing system-wide properties [1], models and
languages considering groups of entities and values as first-class
abstractions [31, 72, 74], verification techniques leveraging model-
checking or simulation to assess the emergents [60, 83, 133]. In the
following, we highlight gaps in the state of the art, denoting key
challenges to be addressed in the context of software engineering
of next-generation distributed systems.

4.1
Handling Homogeneity and Heterogeneity

4.1.1
Integrating collectives and composites. A major challenge in
engineering CCPEs is the integration of heterogeneous entities into
a coherent framework, where the system can be inspected, under-
stood, and designed (or trained) as a single entity (in the spirit
of macroprogramming, cf. Section 3.2.2). Macroprogramming ap-
proaches, in fact, are particularly well-suited for systems composed
of homogeneous entities, where the collective behaviour can be
abstracted and reasoned about at a high level of abstraction. Thus
far, however, there is a lack of formal and practical methods to
deal with heterogeneity from a collective perspective, exploiting
the peculiarities of every device without renouncing the benefit of
observing and designing the system as whole.

platforms), potential external DSLs (as they must be able to gener-
ate code for multiple targets), and may severely limit the adoption
of internal DSLs (as they are constrained by the platforms targeted
by the host language). The latter problem calls for future CCPE-
specific software product lines [125], supporting the customisation
of the final software in a target-specific fashion.

4.2
Specifying and Running Collectives: DSLs,
Middlewares, and Their Interplay

Figure 2: From composites to collectives. In composites (left)
every entity composing the system must be observed, un-
derstood, and designed/trained individually; communication
between entities needs to be modelled explicitly. In collec-
tives (right) all entities are observed, understood, and de-
signed/trained as a single entity; communication is implicit;
dealing with the heterogeneity of the single entities is still
an active research topic. Hybrid systems (centre) are possible:
the system gets partitioned into multiple subsystems, typ-
ically capturing homogeneous devices, building a de-facto
composite of collectives.

Capturing collectives in a way that is actionable analysts and de-
signers requires appropriate abstractions to be reified. Thus, at
some abstraction level, multiple devices must operate as a single
one, although in the respect of their possible heterogeneity. Doing
so, technically, can be performed in two ways:

• through a middleware, creating a software layer that ab-
stracts the collective as a single entity; or
• through a DSL, capturing the collective behaviour at design
time and translating it into executable specifications.

Middlewares are the historically preferred approach to build-
ing a shared layer multiple autonomous entities can interact
through [87, 107]. Indeed, a middleware is a natural solution, as it
provides a shared unified layer, enforcing homogeneity over pos-
sibly heterogeneous devices. This strategy has been used in the
past for non-distributed system with success: we may ascribe to the
“middleware” category all those execution runtimes that could be tar-
geted by multiple programming languages, such as the Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) (targeted by Java, Ruby, Scala, Kotlin, Groovy, and
many other languages) or the Common Language Runtime (CLR)
(targeted by VisualBasic.NET, C#, F#, ...). On the other hand, how-
ever, middlewares can be impractical, as they normally require
multiple implementations for different platforms, and they impose
certain requirements on the underlying systems. In the exemplary
case of the JVM (which is akin in other runtimes) the middleware
has to be implemented for each supported platform, with each imple-
mentation possibly featuring slightly different implementations. We
observe that there is a trade-off between complexity and portability:
the middleware’s portability will be favoured by minimality; on the
other hand, a minimal middleware will hardly provide high-level
abstractions suitable for high-complexity systems, thus requiring
further layers, each one possibly imposing further restrictions on
the underlying platform. For instance, a middleware developed on
top of the JVM will not be capable to be executed on devices or
runtimes for which a JVM is not available, such as the browser, or
low-power wearables.
DSLs come instead with a different set of trade-offs. The idea
behind a DSLs is to create new abstractions as part of the language
itself, letting the compiler (interpreter) figure out how to translate
(execute) the program. DSLs can be realised in two ways: as stan-
dalone (or external) languages [112], or embedded (internal) into
an existing General-Purpose Language (GPL) [113]. The former
approach is more flexible, but it requires more development and
maintenance effort, while the latter is constrained by the syntax
and semantics of the host GPL, but, in turn, can immediately lever-
age its compiler/interpreter, its tooling, and feature a much gentler
learning curve for designers acquainted with the host GPL; an in-
ternal DSL, de facto, is a library designed to exploit the syntactic

In Figure 2, we provide a graphical representation of the differ-
ence between composites and collectives, including also somewhat
hybrid systems, where the whole composed of heterogeneous de-
vices is partitioned into multiple subsystems based on their internal
homogeneity. Although this idea helps with managing complexity,
it does not fully exploit the potential of a collective viewpoint over
a heterogeneous system. Consider, for instance, a system composed
of drones and ground robots: a truly collective approach would be
able to form mixed teams with capabilities that can only be achieved
by combining the two types of devices (for instance, exploiting the
aerial view in specific areas to assist ground robots in navigation
and path-finding); while a hybrid approach would partition the
system into two homogeneous communicating subsystems, losing
the ability to create multiple small independent teams.
Providing means to tame heterogeneity without losing the priv-
ileged observation position of the collective has great potential
to enable a leap forward in several fields, including swarm robot-
ics [48, 76], the IoT [34, 109], and the edge-cloud continuum [52].

4.1.2
Multi-targeting and software product lines. The theme of het-
erogeneity, largely impacting on how abstractions can be captured
(cf. Section 4.2), has rippling effects on the software development
process. In fact, even though the software is designed from a col-
lective perspective, it will have to be executed on possibly very
diverse devices, ranging from edge servers and cloud instances to
smartphones and wearables to modest microcontrollers and sen-
sors. Although decompositional approaches have been proposed to
tackle the problem of some devices being unable to participate in
some parts of the collective computation [33], they do not account
for the production of multiple versions of the software that can ex-
ecute on very diverse devices. This problem can be fractioned into
two macro sub-problems: (1) producing software compatible with
different target platforms from a single specification, and (2) cus-
tomising the specific software configuration considering the final
target. The first problem imposes a significant maintenance burden
on potential middlewares (as they must be able to run on multiple

features of the host language in such a way that the feeling is akin
to using a dedicated language.
The two approaches are not mutually exclusive, rather, they re-
inforce each other. In fact, at some point, the code written in a DSL
will perform communications over a network; and these communi-
cations could well be mediated by a middleware. On the other hand,
the infrastructural support a middleware provides will be exposed
to the designers through an API, which may be expressed, e.g., in
form of an internal DSL. In practice, we have a spectrum of possibil-
ities, and understanding the better trade-off from the two extremes
of a pure DSL directly calling networking primitives under the hood
and a pure middleware driven through a regular API is yet to be
investigated. This investigation becomes even more challenging
under the consideration that different applications (with different
contexts and objectives) developed by different teams (with dif-
ferent expertises) may benefit from different balances, and one
specific design will hardly fit well in all conditions. Clear guidance
directed to CCPE DSL and middleware providers on the trade-off
each design choice brings on the table is yet to be devised.

challenges are posed by the third level, since the number of possible
system states is huge, and in the test cases it is necessary to include
states that trigger all the relevant global system behaviour, e.g., an
important self-adaptation capability [82]. The decision about which
global system states should be actually brought out by test cases
is a difficult trade-off between keeping the number of such states
reasonably small, and covering all the relevant situations [117].
In order to find a good trade-off in a (semi-)automatic way, the
availability of a formal system model and/or of formal requirements
is a promising direction to be pursued.

Test Cases: Outcomes. The nature of CCPEs poses challenges also
for the determination of the test outcome, in terms of the equality
between an expected result (test oracle), and the actual result of
applying certain inputs to a certain system state. The (automatic)
computation of the expected result requires the availability of a
formal specification, similarly as the determination of relevant test
inputs discussed above [117]. However, also the determination of
the actual result is not trivial, for at least two reasons. First, the
global outcome of the test must be determined as the value of a
formula that must be computed by potentially taking into account
the local states of a large number of system entities; in order to com-
pute it in a distributed way, techniques such as distributed Runtime
Verification (RV) may be adopted [13]. Second, the resulting global
state may take some time to materialize due to delays introduced
by the communications between the CCPE entities. Even when a
CCPE behaviour is self-stabilising [133], then, it is key to allow
enough time for the stabilisation before finalising the test result.

4.3
Verification and Validation

Static analysis. A first line of defence against bugs, smells, and
vulnerabilities is static analysis; however, the adoption of static
methods based on model checking is limited by the size, openness,
and autonomy of CCPEs [82]. In response, formal methods are being
developed to support CCPE-tailored analysis [36, 119]. Further steps
are required in this direction, and, from a practitioner’s point of
view, these research efforts need to be reified into actionable tools
(possibly language- or middleware- specific).

Monitoring and runtime verification. As the runtime execution of a
CCPEs is subject to external and often unpredictable influences, a-
priori SE methods are usually not sufficient to guarantee the desired
outcomes. Therefore, they have to be complemented by runtime
monitoring approaches, both as separate tools flagging when man-
ual intervention is needed, and as integrated parts of the system
triggering automatic reactions. However, several challenges arise
when performing runtime monitoring on CCPE. A first challenge is
designing appropriate specification logics, that need to balance two
opposite forces: expressiveness and simplicity. On expressiveness, a
logic should capture enough relevant properties of systems situated
in space and evolving over time. On simplicity, it should allow an
intuitive understanding to enhance its usability, also among domain
experts not proficient in modal logics. This tension has led to many
different logics being developed so far [12, 13, 84, 94], and leaves
room for improvement in future works.
A further challenge is computing monitor results from CCPE
data. Some approaches such as have been restricted so far to of-
fline monitoring, performed remotely on a complete trace of events
gathered from the whole historical data of a CCPE, limiting their ap-
plicability in real-time [94]. Other approaches allow for centralised
online monitoring [84], still requiring to gather all events on a sin-
gle remote computer, but allowing to compute monitor results in
real-time from such event traces. Limited research has been carried
out so far on decentralised monitoring [12, 13], in which monitors
are integrated within the monitored application and run on the
same distributed devices. Each device computes its own view of
the monitored properties according to the knowledge available to
it, without need for a central coordinator. Although this approach

Simulation. In distributed systems, testing is a main challenge [110]:
executing the software on a single machine (even when software
pieces are isolated through Virtual Machines (VMs) or containers)
attenuates (or removes altogether) many of the potential issues to
be faced at runtime, such as network failures, slowdowns, Content
Delivery Network (CDN) updates, and internal Domain Name Sys-
tem (DNS) lookup issues. In the case of CCPEs, the problem is
exacerbated by the large scale, which makes it unpractical (when
plainly impossible) to test the software on a single machine. The
most immediate consequence is that simulation becomes a necessity
in multiple phases of the software production [4]: fast simulator
with a very simplified model of the world can support the developer
in the early stages of development; while more detailed simulations,
with accurate physics and network models (and much longer time
to execute) are needed to support in-depth testing [11]. Capturing
different degrees of complexity with a single simulator is a signifi-
cant challenge [3], we envision that using multiple simulators for
different phases of the development could be a viable solution. Or-
thogonally to scale, the dynamicity of CCPEs, in which violations of
the nominal states are generally unpredictable, is a major challenge
for simulation [3]: generating critical scenarios automatically is
another interesting challenge ahead.

Test Cases: Inputs. CCPEs are made of (possibly very large) groups
of computational entities, which require multiple levels of testing,
as multiagent systems [40]. We can think of (at least) the following
levels: single entity; neighbouring entities; global system. The main

4.5
Learning collective behaviour

allows for greater resilience and faster reaction times of monitors,
it poses additional challenges that have so far limited the moni-
tored logic expressiveness. Future works could improve the current
expressiveness limits in this context.

Despite years of research into synthesizing collective behaviours,
finding an effective and scalable method to address the challenges as-
sociated with learning in such systems remains a complex issue [67].
The intricacy of multi-agent systems escalates significantly as the
number of agents increases [50, 66]; this amplifies the complexity
of the system’s dynamics, complicating the process of discerning
the influence of individual actions on the collective outcome. Below,
we delineate some paramount challenges associated with learning
in collective behaviour.

4.4
Integration with Humans

An important characteristic of CCPEs is that they typically involve
both physical components (such as sensors, robots, drones, ...) as
well as humans. The interaction between humans and the other
cyber-physical entities can be either direct (e.g., through voice
and gestures directly captured with microphones and cameras),
or indirect, with the human interacting through wearable devices.
Two scenarios (of increasing complexity) of integration between
humans and CCPEs can be envisioned and pose peculiar challenges.

Multi-agent Credit Assignment. A paramount issue within multi-
agent systems is the multi-agent credit assignment challenge, as
highlighted by Nguyen et al. [96]. This problem revolves around
the precise identification and rewarding of individual agent actions
that contribute positively towards the collective goal. Techniques
such as COMA and difference rewards [128] have been developed
to tackle this challenge. However, these approaches often entail a
significant computational burden, rendering them less viable for
deployment in large-scale systems. The core strategy of these meth-
ods involves calculating rewards for agents by assessing the impact
of their actions on the collective outcome— a process that requires
simulating the system’s state with and without the agent’s action
to find the differential effect [5]. This dual-simulation approach,
while conceptually appealing for its accuracy in attributing credit,
is notably resource-intensive and may not scale efficiently with the
complexity or size of the system [55].

Humans controlling CCPEs. Humans and physical devices interact
with strict, rigid asymmetric roles. We can consider humans as ex-
ternal, although strictly connected with the CCPE. In this scenario,
the humans typically request services from the CCPEs, and/or per-
form some control over them [132]. In a variation of the scenario,
instead of commands, the humans may provide relevant inputs by
carrying wearables or smartphones, e.g. in healthcare [29].
One crucial aspect in this kind of systems is the cognitive load
affecting the human(s) in charge of controlling the CCPE, espe-
cially when the latter contains many elements, as in a swarm [102].
Another important aspect is the communication modality between
humans and devices (e.g., robots), which can involve speech, gesture,
haptics (if humans and devices are physically close), or screen-based
UIs and Virtual Reality (if the humans and devices are remote) [45].
The main challenges for this kind of scenario are thus mainly
related with Human-Machine Interface (HMI), and in particular
multi-modal interfaces that improve the human user effectiveness
and comfort. A fundamental issue that is related with HMI is the
level of autonomy of the CCPE w.r.t. the human: the right level of
autonomy should be ideally adjusted dynamically to maximize the
performance of the human high-level control over the CCPE [91].

Online Learning. In such systems, agents should learn in real-time,
adapting to changes in the environment and the behaviour of other
agents without leveraging a central trainer. However, unlike single-
agent systems, where the environment typically exhibits stationary
characteristics, online learning in multi-agent systems introduces a
non-stationary environment [28, 50, 66]. This complexity makes it
difficult to determine whether changes are due to environmental
responses or agent behaviour change, potentially leading to un-
desirable emergent behaviours and loss of control over collective
learning [101, 146]. Thus, moving from the current state of the
art, which mainly focuses on offline learning with a centralised
training/decentralised execution approach [61, 78], to decentralised
online learning is a crucial challenge to be further investigated [50].

Humans as CCPE Entities. Humans and physical devices act as a
single CCPE. In this kind of scenario, there isn’t a rigid hierarchy
where humans give (high-level) commands and CCPE entities col-
lectively execute them; instead, the roles of humans and robots
are equal, or at least overlapping, and (partially) interchangeable.
Interesting applications of these hybrid CCPEs include industrial
processes [63, 73, 150], as well as rescue missions [64]. In order
to fully take part into the CCPE, humans typically have to carry
some devices (smartphones, wearables, ...) used to provide inputs
and outputs from/to the human. The main challenge posed by this
kind of systems is that they should run collective algorithms that
take into account and exploit the differences between humans and
artificial entities (e.g., intelligence, or speed), while at the same
time considering them as (partially) interchangeable elements of
the system. This means that the system must have a more or less
sophisticated model of its entities, and adapt its decisions to the
involved entities.

Transfer learning. Another aspect of learning involves the transfer
of knowledge from one domain to another. The capability to apply
knowledge acquired in one context to another, but similar, context
presents a considerable challenge [44]. Even if several solutions
have been proposed so far to address this issue [21], the complex-
ity of transfer learning in CCPEs underscores the need for novel
approaches to facilitate knowledge transfer across contexts effec-
tively. Indeed, in multiagent systems there are several axes is to be
handled, such as the communication between agents, the different
roles of agents, the different capabilities of agents, and the different
environments in which agents operate [44]. In single agent learning,
a novel trend consist in leveraging large pre-trained models (i.e.,
foundational models) to facilitate learning in new tasks [111]. The
adoption of foundational models in CCPEs could mark a shift to-
ward more efficient and effective learning mechanisms, suggesting
a promising avenue for future exploration.

5
CONCLUSION

[13] Giorgio Audrito, Ferruccio Damiani, Volker Stolz, Gianluca Torta, and Mirko
Viroli. 2022. Distributed runtime verification by past-CTL and the field calculus.
J. Syst. Softw. 187 (2022), 111251.
[14] Giorgio Audrito, Mirko Viroli, Ferruccio Damiani, Danilo Pianini, and Jacob Beal.
2019. A Higher-Order Calculus of Computational Fields. ACM Trans. Comput.
Logic 20, 1, Article 5 (jan 2019), 55 pages.
[15] Jacob Beal, Stefan Dulman, Kyle Usbeck, Mirko Viroli, and Nikolaus Correll.
2013. Organizing the Aggregate: Languages for Spatial Computing. In Formal
and Practical Aspects of Domain-Specific Languages: Recent Developments. IGI
Global, Chapter 16, 436–501.
[16] Christian Becker, Christine Julien, Philippe Lalanda, and Franco Zambonelli.
2019. Pervasive computing middleware: current trends and emerging challenges.
CCF Trans. Pervasive Comput. Interact. 1, 1 (2019), 10–23.
1007/S42486-019-00005-2
[17] Kirstie L. Bellman, Jean Botev, Ada Diaconescu, Lukas Esterle, Christian Gruhl,
Christopher Landauer, Peter R. Lewis, Phyllis R. Nelson, Evangelos Pournaras,
Anthony Stein, and Sven Tomforde. 2021. Self-improving system integration:
Mastering continuous change. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 117 (2021), 29–46.

[18] Marco Bernardo, Rocco De Nicola, and Jane Hillston (Eds.). 2016. Formal Methods
for the Quantitative Evaluation of Collective Adaptive Systems - 16th International
School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication, and
Software Systems, SFM 2016, Bertinoro, Italy, June 20-24, 2016, Advanced Lectures.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 9700. Springer.

1007/978-3-319-34096-8
[19] Olivier Boissier, Rafael H Bordini, Jomi Hubner, and Alessandro Ricci. 2020.
Multi-agent oriented programming: programming multi-agent systems using Ja-
CaMo. MIT Press.
[20] Eric Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, and Guy Theraulaz. 1999. Swarm intelligence:
from natural to artificial systems. Oxford university press.
[21] Georgios Boutsioukis, Ioannis Partalas, and Ioannis P. Vlahavas. 2011. Transfer
Learning in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Domains. In Recent Advances
in Reinforcement Learning - 9th European Workshop, EWRL 2011, Athens, Greece,
September 9-11, 2011, Revised Selected Papers (Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 7188), Scott Sanner and Marcus Hutter (Eds.). Springer, 249–260.
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-29946-9_25
[22] Michele Braccini, Andrea Roli, Marco Villani, and Roberto Serra. 2016. Au-
tomatic Design of Boolean Networks for Cell Differentiation. In Advances in
Artificial Life, Evolutionary Computation, and Systems Chemistry - 11th Italian
Workshop, WIVACE 2016, Fisciano, Italy, October 4-6, 2016, Revised Selected Pa-
pers (Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 708). 91–102.

[23] Manuele Brambilla, Eliseo Ferrante, Mauro Birattari, and Marco Dorigo. 2013.
Swarm robotics: a review from the swarm engineering perspective. Swarm
Intell. 7, 1 (2013), 1–41.
[24] Manfred Broy and Albrecht Schmidt. 2014. Challenges in Engineering Cyber-
Physical Systems. Computer 47, 2 (2014), 70–72.
2014.30
[25] Antonio Bucchiarone and Marina Mongiello. 2019. Ten Years of Self-adaptive
Systems: From Dynamic Ensembles to Collective Adaptive Systems. In From
Software Engineering to Formal Methods and Tools, and Back (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 11865). Springer, 19–39.
030-30985-5_3
[26] Bruno Buchberger. 2023. Automated programming, symbolic computation,
machine learning: my personal view. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 91, 5 (2023), 569–
589.
[27] Tomás Bures, Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Petr Hnetynka, Jaroslav Keznikl, Michal
Kit, and Frantisek Plásil. 2013. DEECO: an ensemble-based component system. In
CBSE’13, Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on Component Based
Software Engineering. ACM, 81–90.
[28] Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. 2008. A Comprehensive
Survey of Multiagent Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
Part C 38, 2 (2008), 156–172.
[29] Davide Calvaresi, Mauro Marinoni, Aldo Franco Dragoni, Roger Hilfiker, and
Michael Schumacher. 2019. Real-time multi-agent systems for telerehabilitation
scenarios. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 96 (2019), 217–231.
10.1016/j.artmed.2019.02.001
[30] Roberto Casadei. 2023. Artificial Collective Intelligence Engineering: A Survey
of Concepts and Perspectives. Artif. Life 29, 4 (2023), 433–467.
10.1162/ARTL_A_00408
[31] Roberto Casadei. 2023. Macroprogramming: Concepts, State of the Art, and
Opportunities of Macroscopic Behaviour Modelling. ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 13s
(2023), 275:1–275:37.
[32] Roberto Casadei, Giancarlo Fortino, Danilo Pianini, Andrea Placuzzi, Clau-
dio Savaglio, and Mirko Viroli. 2022. A Methodology and Simulation-Based
Toolchain for Estimating Deployment Performance of Smart Collective Ser-
vices at the Edge. IEEE Internet Things J. 9, 20 (2022), 20136–20148.

//doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.3172470

In this paper, we presented challenges, current research efforts,
and future research directions for a collective computing para-
digm in software engineering. We showed the relevance of this
paradigm given the growing interest in large-scale cyber-physical
ecosystems. By reviewing key themes and relevant contributions
in CCPEs engineering, we categorised current research efforts on
both techniques, abstractions, and tools. From this, we identified
the challenges ahead that will require innovative solutions. These
include the handling of homogeneity and heterogeneity; the devel-
opment of DSLs, middleware and tools; the bridging of global and
local perspectives in system analysis, design, and implementation;
the integration with humans; and collective learning approaches.
Addressing these challenges will be essential for unlocking the full
potential of CCPEs and advancing the state of the art in software
engineering cyber-physical ecosystems research.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been partially supported by the Italian MUR PRIN
2020 Project “COMMON-WEARS” (2020HCWWLP).

REFERENCES

[1] Dhaminda B. Abeywickrama, Nicola Bicocchi, Marco Mamei, and Franco
Zambonelli. 2020.
The SOTA approach to engineering collective adaptive
systems.
Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 22, 4 (2020), 399–415.

//doi.org/10.1007/S10009-020-00554-3
[2] Gregory D. Abowd. 2016. Beyond Weiser: From Ubiquitous to Collective Com-
puting. Computer 49, 1 (2016), 17–23.
[3] Afsoon Afzal, Claire Le Goues, Michael Hilton, and Christopher Steven Timper-
ley. 2020. A Study on Challenges of Testing Robotic Systems. In 2020 IEEE 13th
International Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST).
96–107.
[4] Afsoon Afzal, Deborah S. Katz, Claire Le Goues, and Christopher S. Timperley.
2021. Simulation for Robotics Test Automation: Developer Perspectives. In
2021 14th IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST).
263–274.
[5] Adrian K. Agogino and Kagan Tumer. 2004. Unifying Temporal and Struc-
tural Credit Assignment Problems. In 3rd International Joint Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2004), 19-23 August 2004,
New York, NY, USA. IEEE Computer Society, 980–987.
AAMAS.2004.10098
[6] Gianluca Aguzzi, Roberto Casadei, and Mirko Viroli. 2022. Machine Learning
for Aggregate Computing: a Research Roadmap. In 42nd IEEE International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS Workshops, Bologna, Italy,
July 10, 2022. IEEE, 119–124.
[7] Gianluca Aguzzi, Roberto Casadei, and Mirko Viroli. 2022. Towards Rein-
forcement Learning-based Aggregate Computing. In Coordination Models and
Languages - 24th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference, COORDINATION 2022,
Proceedings (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 13271). Springer, 72–91.

[8] Rima Al Ali, Lubomír Bulej, Jan Kofron, and Tomás Bures. 2022. A guide to design
uncertainty-aware self-adaptive components in Cyber-Physical Systems. Future
Gener. Comput. Syst. 128 (2022), 466–489.
2021.10.027
[9] Yehia Abd Alrahman, Rocco De Nicola, and Michele Loreti. 2020. Programming
interactions in collective adaptive systems by relying on attribute-based com-
munication. Sci. Comput. Program. 192 (2020), 102428.
SCICO.2020.102428
[10] Majed Alwateer, Seng W. Loke, and Niroshinie Fernando. 2019. Enabling Drone
Services: Drone Crowdsourcing and Drone Scripting. IEEE Access 7 (2019),
110035–110049.
[11] Paolo Arcaini, Xiao-Yi Zhang, and Fuyuki Ishikawa. 2021. Targeting Patterns of
Driving Characteristics in Testing Autonomous Driving Systems. In 2021 14th
IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST). 295–305.

[12] Giorgio Audrito, Roberto Casadei, Ferruccio Damiani, Volker Stolz, and Mirko
Viroli. 2021. Adaptive distributed monitors of spatial properties for cyber-
physical systems. J. Syst. Softw. 175 (2021), 110908.
JSS.2021.110908

[33] Roberto Casadei, Danilo Pianini, Andrea Placuzzi, Mirko Viroli, and Danny
Weyns. 2020. Pulverization in Cyber-Physical Systems: Engineering the Self-
Organizing Logic Separated from Deployment. Future Internet 12, 11 (2020), 203.

[34] Roberto Casadei and Mirko Viroli. 2018. Collective Abstractions and Platforms
for Large-Scale Self-Adaptive IoT. In 2018 IEEE 3rd International Workshops on
Foundations and Applications of Self* Systems (FAS*W), Trento, Italy, September
3-7, 2018. IEEE, 106–111.
[35] Christos G. Cassandras and Stephane Lafortune. 2021. Introduction to Discrete
Event Systems (3nd ed.). Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated.
[36] Valentina Castiglioni, Michele Loreti, and Simone Tini. 2023. A framework to
measure the robustness of programs in the unpredictable environment. Log.
Methods Comput. Sci. 19, 3 (2023).
[37] Swarat Chaudhuri, Kevin Ellis, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, Armando
Solar-Lezama, and Yisong Yue. 2021. Neurosymbolic Programming. Found.
Trends Program. Lang. 7, 3 (2021), 158–243.
[38] Bo Cheng, Da Zhu, Shuai Zhao, and Junliang Chen. 2016. Situation-Aware IoT
Service Coordination Using the Event-Driven SOA Paradigm. IEEE Trans. Netw.
Serv. Manag. 13, 2 (2016), 349–361.
[39] François Chollet. 2019.
On the measure of intelligence.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.01547 (2019).
[40] Andrew G. Clark, Neil Walkinshaw, and Robert M. Hierons. 2021. Test case
generation for agent-based models: A systematic literature review. Information
and Software Technology 135 (2021).
[41] Marco Conti, Sajal K. Das, Chatschik Bisdikian, Mohan Kumar, Lionel M. Ni,
Andrea Passarella, George Roussos, Gerhard Tröster, Gene Tsudik, and Franco
Zambonelli. 2012. Looking ahead in pervasive computing: Challenges and
opportunities in the era of cyber-physical convergence. Pervasive Mob. Comput.
8, 1 (2012), 2–21.
[42] Hélène Coullon, Ludovic Henrio, Frédéric Loulergue, and Simon Robillard.
2023. Component-Based Distributed Software Reconfiguration: A Verification-
Oriented Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. (may 2023).

3595376
[43] Luís Cruz-Filipe and Fabrizio Montesi. 2020. A core model for choreographic
programming. Theor. Comput. Sci. 802 (2020), 38–66.
tcs.2019.07.005
[44] Felipe Leno da Silva and Anna Helena Reali Costa. 2019. A Survey on Transfer
Learning for Multiagent Reinforcement Learning Systems. J. Artif. Intell. Res.
64 (2019), 645–703.
[45] Abhinav Dahiya, Alexander M. Aroyo, Kerstin Dautenhahn, and Stephen L.
Smith. 2023. A survey of multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction systems. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems 161 (2023), 104335.
2022.104335
[46] Marcos Dias de Assunção, Alexandre Da Silva Veith, and Rajkumar Buyya.
2018. Distributed data stream processing and edge computing: A survey on
resource elasticity and future directions. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 103 (2018), 1–17.

[47] Audelia Gumarus Dharmawan, Gim Song Soh, Shaohui Foong, Roland Bouf-
fanais, and Kristin L. Wood. 2019. Design innovation of mesoscale robotic
swarms: applications to cooperative urban sensing and mapping. Frontiers Inf.
Technol. Electron. Eng. 20, 12 (2019), 1618–1631.
1900384
[48] Marco Dorigo, Guy Theraulaz, and Vito Trianni. 2020. Reflections on the
future of swarm robotics. Science Robotics 5, 49 (Dec. 2020), eabe4385.
//doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abe4385
[49] Nicola Dragoni, Saverio Giallorenzo, Alberto Lluch-Lafuente, Manuel Mazzara,
Fabrizio Montesi, Ruslan Mustafin, and Larisa Safina. 2017. Microservices:
Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow. In Present and Ulterior Software Engineering.
Springer, 195–216.
[50] Wei Du and Shifei Ding. 2021. A survey on multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning: from the perspective of challenges and applications. Artif. Intell. Rev.
54, 5 (2021), 3215–3238.
[51] Jose Luis Fernandez-Marquez, Giovanna Di Marzo Serugendo, Sara Montagna,
Mirko Viroli, and Josep Lluís Arcos. 2013. Description and composition of
bio-inspired design patterns: a complete overview. Nat. Comput. 12, 1 (2013),
43–67.
[52] Ana Juan Ferrer, Sören Becker, Florian Schmidt, Lauritz Thamsen, and Odej
Kao. 2021. Towards a Cognitive Compute Continuum: An Architecture for
Ad-Hoc Self-Managed Swarms. In 21st IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing, CCGrid 2021. IEEE, 634–641.

//doi.org/10.1109/CCGRID51090.2021.00076
[53] Alois Ferscha, Paul Lukowicz, and Franco Zambonelli. 2014. The superorganism
of massive collective wearables. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’14 Adjunct
Publication. ACM, 1077–1084.
[54] Dario Floreano and Laurent Keller. 2010. Evolution of Adaptive Behaviour in
Robots by Means of Darwinian Selection. PLoS Biology 8, 1 (Jan. 2010), e1000292.

[55] Jakob N. Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli,
and Shimon Whiteson. 2018. Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
(AAAI-18), the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18),
and the 8th AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence
(EAAI-18). AAAI Press, 2974–2982.
[56] Gianpiero Francesca, Manuele Brambilla, Arne Brutschy, Lorenzo Garattoni,
Roman Miletitch, Gaëtan Podevijn, Andreagiovanni Reina, Touraj Soleymani,
Mattia Salvaro, Carlo Pinciroli, Franco Mascia, Vito Trianni, and Mauro Birattari.
2015. AutoMoDe-Chocolate: automatic design of control software for robot
swarms. Swarm Intell. 9, 2-3 (2015), 125–152.
015-0107-9
[57] Gianpiero Francesca, Manuele Brambilla, Arne Brutschy, Vito Trianni, and
Mauro Birattari. 2014. AutoMoDe: A novel approach to the automatic design
of control software for robot swarms. Swarm Intell. 8, 2 (2014), 89–112.
//doi.org/10.1007/S11721-014-0092-4
[58] Carlos Gershenson, Vito Trianni, Justin Werfel, and Hiroki Sayama. 2020. Self-
Organization and Artificial Life. Artif. Life 26, 3 (2020), 391–408.
org/10.1162/artl_a_00324
[59] Jacques Gignoux, Guillaume Chérel, Ian D. Davies, Shayne R. Flint, and Eric
Lateltin. 2017. Emergence and complex systems: The contribution of dynamic
graph theory. Ecological Complexity 31 (Sept. 2017), 34–49.
1016/j.ecocom.2017.02.006
[60] Nicola Del Giudice, Lorenzo Matteucci, Michela Quadrini, Aniqa Rehman, and
Michele Loreti. 2022. Sibilla: A Tool for Reasoning about Collective Systems. In
Coordination Models and Languages - 24th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference,
COORDINATION 2022, Proceedings (LNCS, Vol. 13271). Springer, 92–98.
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08143-9_6
[61] Sven Gronauer and Klaus Diepold. 2022. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing: a survey. Artif. Intell. Rev. 55, 2 (2022), 895–943.
S10462-021-09996-W
[62] Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. 2017. Program Synthesis.
Found. Trends Program. Lang. 4, 1-2 (2017), 1–119.

2500000010
[63] Daqiang Guo. 2024. Fast scheduling of human-robot teams collaboration on syn-
chronised production-logistics tasks in aircraft assembly. Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing 85 (2024).
[64] Lydia Habib, Marie-Pierre Pacaux-Lemoine, and Patrick Millot. 2018. Human-
Robots Team Cooperation in Crisis Management Mission. In 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). 3219–3224.

[65] Feijuan He, Yudai Pan, Qika Lin, Xianglin Miao, and Zhouguo Chen. 2019.
Collective Intelligence: A Taxonomy and Survey. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 170213–
170225.
[66] Pablo Hernandez-Leal, Bilal Kartal, and Matthew E. Taylor. 2018. Is multiagent
deep reinforcement learning the answer or the question? A brief survey. CoRR
abs/1810.05587 (2018). arXiv:1810.05587
[67] Pablo Hernandez-Leal, Bilal Kartal, and Matthew E. Taylor. 2019. A survey and
critique of multiagent deep reinforcement learning. Auton. Agents Multi Agent
Syst. 33, 6 (2019), 750–797.
[68] Dan Hirsch, Paola Inverardi, and Ugo Montanari. 1998. Graph grammars and
constraint solving for software architecture styles. In Proceedings of the Third
International Workshop on Software Architecture, ISAW ’98. ACM, 69–72.
//doi.org/10.1145/288408.288426
[69] Mohammad Aminul Hoque, Md. Mahmud Hossain, Shahid Al Noor, S. M. Riazul
Islam, and Ragib Hasan. 2022. IoTaaS: Drone-Based Internet of Things as a
Service Framework for Smart Cities. IEEE Internet Things J. 9, 14 (2022), 12425–
12439.
[70] Jennifer Horkoff, Fatma Basak Aydemir, Evellin Cardoso, Tong Li, Alejandro
Maté, Elda Paja, Mattia Salnitri, Luca Piras, John Mylopoulos, and Paolo Giorgini.
2019. Goal-oriented requirements engineering: an extended systematic mapping
study. Requir. Eng. 24, 2 (2019), 133–160.
0280-Z
[71] Bryan Horling and Victor R. Lesser. 2004. A survey of multi-agent organizational
paradigms. Knowl. Eng. Rev. 19, 4 (2004), 281–316.

S0269888905000317
[72] Omar Inverso, Catia Trubiani, and Emilio Tuosto. 2020. Abstractions for Collec-
tive Adaptive Systems. In Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification
and Validation: Engineering Principles - 9th International Symposium on Lever-
aging Applications of Formal Methods, ISoLA 2020, Proceedings, Part II (LNCS,
Vol. 12477). Springer, 243–260.
[73] Jana Jost, Thomas Kirks, and Benedikt Mättig. 2017. Multi-agent systems for
decentralized control and adaptive interaction between humans and machines
for industrial environments. In 2017 7th IEEE International Conference on System
Engineering and Technology (ICSET). 95–100.
2017.8123427
[74] Iwens Gervásio Sene Júnior, Thalia S. Santana, Renato F. Bulcão-Neto, and Barry
Porter. 2022. The state of the art of macroprogramming in IoT: An update. J.

Internet Serv. Appl. 13, 1 (2022), 54–65.
[75] Nanxi Kang, Zhenming Liu, Jennifer Rexford, and David Walker. 2013. Optimiz-
ing the "one big switch" abstraction in software-defined networks. In Conference
on emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies (CoNEXT’13), Proceedings
of. ACM, 13–24.
[76] Daniela Kengyel, Heiko Hamann, Payam Zahadat, Gerald Radspieler, Franz
Wotawa, and Thomas Schmickl. 2015. Potential of Heterogeneity in Collective
Behaviors: A Case Study on Heterogeneous Swarms. In PRIMA 2015: Principles
and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems - 18th International Conference, Proceedings
(LNCS, Vol. 9387). Springer, 201–217.
8_13
[77] Jeffrey O. Kephart and David M. Chess. 2003. The Vision of Autonomic Com-
puting. Computer 36, 1 (2003), 41–50.
[78] Landon Kraemer and Bikramjit Banerjee. 2016. Multi-agent reinforcement
learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning. Neurocomputing 190 (2016),
82–94.
[79] Angel Lagares Lemos, Florian Daniel, and Boualem Benatallah. 2016. Web
Service Composition: A Survey of Techniques and Tools. ACM Comput. Surv.
48, 3 (2016), 33:1–33:41.
[80] Meng Li, Pan Pei, F. Richard Yu, Pengbo Si, Yu Li, Enchang Sun, and Yanhua
Zhang. 2022. Cloud-Edge Collaborative Resource Allocation for Blockchain-
Enabled Internet of Things: A Collective Reinforcement Learning Approach.
IEEE Internet Things J. 9, 22 (2022), 23115–23129.
2022.3185289
[81] Shancang Li, Li Da Xu, and Shanshan Zhao. 2015. The internet of things: a
survey. Inf. Syst. Frontiers 17, 2 (2015), 243–259.
014-9492-7
[82] Yoo Jin Lim, Eunkyoung Jee, Donghwan Shin, and Doo-Hwan Bae. 2015. Efficient
Testing of Self-Adaptive Behaviors in Collective Adaptive Systems. In 39th IEEE
Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference, COMPSAC 2015, Volume
2. IEEE Computer Society, 216–221.
[83] Michele Loreti and Jane Hillston. 2016. Modelling and Analysis of Collec-
tive Adaptive Systems with CARMA and its Tools. In Formal Methods for
the Quantitative Evaluation of Collective Adaptive Systems - 16th International
School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication, and Soft-
ware Systems, SFM 2016, Advanced Lectures (LNCS, Vol. 9700). Springer, 83–119.

[84] Meiyi Ma, Ezio Bartocci, Eli Lifland, John A. Stankovic, and Lu Feng. 2021. A
Novel Spatial-Temporal Specification-Based Monitoring System for Smart Cities.
IEEE Internet Things J. 8, 15 (2021), 11793–11806.
2021.3069943
[85] Ivano Malavolta, Patricia Lago, Henry Muccini, Patrizio Pelliccione, and Antony
Tang. 2013. What Industry Needs from Architectural Languages: A Survey. IEEE
Trans. Software Eng. 39, 6 (2013), 869–891.
[86] Thomas W Malone and Michael S Bernstein. 2022. Handbook of collective
intelligence. MIT press.
[87] Marco Mamei and Franco Zambonelli. 2009. Programming pervasive and mobile
computing applications: The TOTA approach. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
18, 4 (2009), 15:1–15:56.
[88] Claudio Masolo, Laure Vieu, Roberta Ferrario, Stefano Borgo, and Daniele
Porello. 2020. Pluralities, Collectives, and Composites. In Formal Ontology in
Information Systems - Proceedings of the 11th International Conference, FOIS 2020
(Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, Vol. 330). IOS Press, 186–200.

[89] George E. Mobus and Michael C. Kalton. 2015. Principles of Systems Science.
Springer.
[90] Fabrizio Montesi. 2023. Introduction to Choreographies. Cambridge University
Press.
[91] Salama A Mostafa, Mohd Sharifuddin Ahmad, and Aida Mustapha. 2019. Ad-
justable autonomy: a systematic literature review. Artificial Intelligence Review
51 (2019), 149–186.
[92] Luca Mottola and Gian Pietro Picco. 2011. Programming wireless sensor net-
works: Fundamental concepts and state of the art. ACM Comput. Surv. 43, 3
(2011), 19:1–19:51.
[93] Maurizio Murgia, Riccardo Pinciroli, Catia Trubiani, and Emilio Tuosto. 2023.
Comparing perfomance abstractions for collective adaptive systems. Int. J. Softw.
Tools Technol. Transf. 25, 5 (2023), 785–798.
00728-9
[94] Laura Nenzi, Ezio Bartocci, Luca Bortolussi, and Michele Loreti. 2022. A Logic for
Monitoring Dynamic Networks of Spatially-distributed Cyber-Physical Systems.
Log. Methods Comput. Sci. 18, 1 (2022).
4)2022
[95] Ryan Newton, Arvind, and Matt Welsh. 2005. Building up to macroprogram-
ming: an intermediate language for sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, IPSN
2005. IEEE, 37–44.
[96] Duc Thien Nguyen, Akshat Kumar, and Hoong Chuin Lau. 2018. Credit Assign-
ment For Collective Multiagent RL With Global Rewards. In Advances in Neural

Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018. 8113–8124.
[97] Rocco De Nicola, Stefan Jähnichen, and Martin Wirsing. 2020. Rigorous engi-
neering of collective adaptive systems: special section. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol.
Transf. 22, 4 (2020), 389–397.
[98] Rocco De Nicola, Michele Loreti, Rosario Pugliese, and Francesco Tiezzi. 2014.
A Formal Approach to Autonomic Systems Programming: The SCEL Language.
ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst. 9, 2 (2014), 7:1–7:29.
2619998
[99] Victor Noël and Franco Zambonelli. 2015. Methodological Guidelines for Engi-
neering Self-organization and Emergence. In Software Engineering for Collective
Autonomic Systems - The ASCENS Approach. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 8998. Springer, 355–378.
[100] Anne-Cécile Orgerie, Marcos Dias de Assunção, and Laurent Lefèvre. 2013.
A survey on techniques for improving the energy efficiency of large-scale
distributed systems. ACM Comput. Surv. 46, 4 (2013), 47:1–47:31.
org/10.1145/2532637
[101] Afshin Oroojlooy and Davood Hajinezhad. 2023. A review of cooperative multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning. Appl. Intell. 53, 11 (2023), 13677–13722.

[102] Anita Paas, Emily B. J. Coffey, Giovanni Beltrame, and David St-Onge. 2022.
Towards evaluating the impact of swarm robotic control strategy on operators’
cognitive load. In 2022 31st IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN). 217–223.
MAN53752.2022.9900763
[103] R. K. Pandey. 2010. Architectural description languages (ADLs) vs UML: a
review. ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 35, 3 (2010), 1–5.
1145/1764810.1764828
[104] Chris Peltz. 2003. Web Services Orchestration and Choreography. Computer 36,
10 (2003), 46–52.
[105] Danilo Pianini, Roberto Casadei, Mirko Viroli, and Antonio Natali. 2021. Parti-
tioned integration and coordination via the self-organising coordination regions
pattern. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 114 (2021), 44–68.
FUTURE.2020.07.032
[106] Carlo Pinciroli and Giovanni Beltrame. 2016. Buzz: A Programming Language
for Robot Swarms. IEEE Softw. 33, 4 (2016), 97–100.
2016.95
[107] Agostino Poggi, Giovanni Rimassa, and Paola Turci. 2002. What Agent Middle-
ware Can (And Should) Do For You. Appl. Artif. Intell. 16, 9-10 (2002), 677–698.

[108] M. Prokopenko. 2013. Guided Self-Organization: Inception. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
[109] Tie Qiu, Ning Chen, Keqiu Li, Mohammed Atiquzzaman, and Wenbing Zhao.
2018. How Can Heterogeneous Internet of Things Build Our Future: A Survey.
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 20, 3 (2018), 2011–2027.
COMST.2018.2803740
[110] Ewaryst Rafajlowicz. 2008. Testing Homogeneity of Coefficients in Distributed
Systems With Application to Quality Monitoring. IEEE Trans. Control. Syst.
Technol. 16, 2 (2008), 314–321.
[111] Scott E. Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo,
Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay,
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards,
Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and
Nando de Freitas. 2022. A Generalist Agent. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2022 (2022).

[112] Pierluigi Riti. 2017. External DSL. Apress, 59–69.
1-4842-3036-7_4
[113] Pierluigi Riti. 2017. Internal DSL. Apress, 45–57.
4842-3036-7_3
[114] Alejandro Rodríguez, Alexander Grushin, and James A. Reggia. 2007. Swarm
Intelligence Systems Using Guided Self-Organization for Collective Problem
Solving. Adv. Complex Syst. 10, supp01 (2007), 5–34.
S0219525907001069
[115] R. Keith Sawyer. 2003. Artificial Societies: Multiagent Systems and the Micro-
Macro Link in Sociological Theory. Sociological Methods &; Research 31, 3 (Feb.
2003), 325–363.
[116] Ognjen Scekic, Tommaso Schiavinotto, Svetoslav Videnov, Michael Rovatsos,
Hong Linh Truong, Daniele Miorandi, and Schahram Dustdar. 2020. A Program-
ming Model for Hybrid Collaborative Adaptive Systems. IEEE Trans. Emerg.
Top. Comput. 8, 1 (2020), 6–19.
[117] Bento R. Siqueira, Fabiano C. Ferrari, Kathiani E. Souza, Valter V. Camargo,
and Rogério de Lemos. 2021. Testing of adaptive and context-aware systems:
approaches and challenges. Software Testing, Verification and Reliability 31, 7
(2021).
[118] Adrian Sosic, Wasiur R. KhudaBukhsh, Abdelhak M. Zoubir, and Heinz Koeppl.
2017. Inverse Reinforcement Learning in Swarm Systems. (2017), 1413–1421.

[119] Luca Di Stefano and Frédéric Lang. 2023. Compositional Verification of Stigmer-
gic Collective Systems. In Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpreta-
tion - 24th International Conference, VMCAI 2023, Proceedings (LNCS, Vol. 13881).
Springer, 155–176.
[120] Shweta Suran, Vishwajeet Pattanaik, and Dirk Draheim. 2021. Frameworks for
Collective Intelligence: A Systematic Literature Review. ACM Comput. Surv. 53,
1 (2021), 14:1–14:36.
[121] Shweta Suran, Vishwajeet Pattanaik, Ralf H. J. M. Kurvers, Carina Antonia
Hallin, Anna De Liddo, Robert Krimmer, and Dirk Draheim. 2022. Building
Global Societies on Collective Intelligence: Challenges and Opportunities. Digit.
Gov. Res. Pract. 3, 4 (2022), 31:1–31:6.
[122] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 2018. Reinforcement Learning (2 ed.).
Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA.
[123] Tadeusz M Szuba. 2001. Computational collective intelligence. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
[124] Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Maarten van Steen. 2007. Distributed systems -
principles and paradigms, 2nd Edition. Pearson Education.
[125] Maurice H. ter Beek and Ina Schaefer. 2023. Systems and software product lines
of the future. J. Syst. Softw. 199 (2023), 111622.
2023.111622
[126] Yuanyuan Tian, Andrey Balmin, Severin Andreas Corsten, Shirish Tatikonda,
and John McPherson. 2013.
From "Think Like a Vertex" to "Think Like a
Graph". Proc. VLDB Endow. 7, 3 (2013), 193–204.

2732232.2732238
[127] Vito Trianni. 2008. Evolutionary Swarm Robotics - Evolving Self-Organising Be-
haviours in Groups of Autonomous Robots. Studies in Computational Intelligence,
Vol. 108. Springer.
[128] Kagan Tumer and Adrian K. Agogino. 2007. Distributed agent-based air traffic
flow management. In 6th International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2007). IFAAMAS, 255.
1329125.1329434
[129] Kagan Tumer and David H Wolpert. 2004. A Survey of Collectives. In Collectives
and the design of complex systems, Kagan Tumer and David H Wolpert (Eds.).
Springer Science & Business Media, Chapter 1.
[130] Maarten van Steen, Guillaume Pierre, and Spyros Voulgaris. 2012. Challenges
in very large distributed systems. J. Internet Serv. Appl. 3, 1 (2012), 59–66.

[131] Luis M. Vaquero, Félix Cuadrado, Yehia Elkhatib, Jorge Bernal Bernabé,
Satish Narayana Srirama, and Mohamed Faten Zhani. 2019. Research chal-
lenges in nextgen service orchestration. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 90 (2019),
20–38.
[132] V. Villani, B. Capelli, and C. et al. Secchi. 2020. Humans interacting with multi-
robot systems: a natural affect-based approach. Auton Robot 44 (2020), 601–616.

[133] Mirko Viroli, Giorgio Audrito, Jacob Beal, Ferruccio Damiani, and Danilo Pianini.
2018. Engineering Resilient Collective Adaptive Systems by Self-Stabilisation.
ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul. 28, 2 (2018), 16:1–16:28.
1145/3177774
[134] Mirko Viroli, Jacob Beal, Ferruccio Damiani, Giorgio Audrito, Roberto Casadei,
and Danilo Pianini. 2019. From distributed coordination to field calculus and
aggregate computing. J. Log. Algebraic Methods Program. 109 (2019).
//doi.org/10.1016/J.JLAMP.2019.100486
[135] Pascal Weisenburger, Johannes Wirth, and Guido Salvaneschi. 2020. A Survey
of Multitier Programming. ACM Comput. Surv. 53, 4 (2020), 81:1–81:35.
//doi.org/10.1145/3397495
[136] Danny Weyns. 2020. An introduction to self-adaptive systems: A contemporary
software engineering perspective. John Wiley & Sons.
[137] Martin Wirsing, Matthias M. Hölzl, Nora Koch, and Philip Mayer (Eds.). 2015.
Software Engineering for Collective Autonomic Systems - The ASCENS Approach.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8998. Springer.

1007/978-3-319-16310-9
[138] Martin Wirsing, Matthias M. Hölzl, Mirco Tribastone, and Franco Zambonelli.
2011. ASCENS: Engineering Autonomic Service-Component Ensembles. In
Formal Methods for Components and Objects, 10th International Symposium,
FMCO 2011, Revised Selected Papers (LNCS, Vol. 7542). Springer, 1–24.
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35887-6_1
[139] David H. Wolpert and Kagan Tumer. 1999. An Introduction to Collective Intelli-
gence.
[140] Zena Wood and Antony Galton. 2009. A taxonomy of collective phenomena.
Appl. Ontology 4, 3-4 (2009), 267–292.
[141] Michael J. Wooldridge. 2009. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems, Second
Edition. Wiley.
[142] Hansong Xu, Wei Yu, David W. Griffith, and Nada Golmie. 2018. A Survey
on Industrial Internet of Things: A Cyber-Physical Systems Perspective. IEEE
Access 6 (2018), 78238–78259.
[143] Yaodong Yang. 2021. Many-agent reinforcement learning. Ph. D. Dissertation.
UCL (University College London).

[144] Yichen Yang, Jeevana Priya Inala, Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, Armando Solar-
Lezama, and Martin C. Rinard. 2021. Program Synthesis Guided Reinforcement
Learning for Partially Observed Environments. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021. 29669–29683.
[145] Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Minne Li, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang.
2018. Mean Field Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018 (Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, Vol. 80). PMLR, 5567–5576.
press/v80/yang18d.html
[146] Yaodong Yang and Jun Wang. 2020. An Overview of Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning from Game Theoretical Perspective. CoRR abs/2011.00583 (2020).
arXiv:2011.00583
[147] Dayong Ye, Minjie Zhang, and Athanasios V. Vasilakos. 2017. A Survey of
Self-Organization Mechanisms in Multiagent Systems. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. Syst. 47, 3 (2017), 441–461.
[148] Peijun Ye, Yuanyuan Chen, Fenghua Zhu, Yisheng Lv, Wanze Lu, and Fei-Yue
Wang. 2022. Bridging the Micro and Macro: Calibration of Agent-Based Model
Using Mean-Field Dynamics. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 52, 11 (2022), 11397–11406.

[149] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexan-
dre M. Bayen, and Yi Wu. 2022.
The Surprising Effectiveness of PPO
in Cooperative Multi-Agent Games. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022.

files/paper/2022/hash/9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-Abstract-
Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html
[150] Zequn Zhang, Dunbing Tang, and Qingwei Nie. 2021. Research on Workers
Integration in Smart Factories With Multi-Agent Control System. IEEE Access 9
(2021).