A Critical Review of Causal Reasoning Benchmarks for Large Language Models

Linying Yang1, Vik Shirvaikar1, Oscar Clivio1, Fabian Falck1

1Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
Corresponding author:

Abstract

• Type 2: “Discovering new knowledge from data.”
Example: Here are outcomes for our business if we tried
strategy A vs. strategy B: [text about outcomes]. Which
one leads to greater success?
• Type 3: “Quantitatively estimating the consequences of
actions.”
Example: The patient got doses X and Y of certain
medicines last time and reported a 40% decrease in blood
pressure. What dose Z should I give the patient this time?

arXiv:2407.08029v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jul 2024

Numerous benchmarks aim to evaluate the capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs) for causal inference and rea-
soning. However, many of them can likely be solved through
the retrieval of domain knowledge, questioning whether they
achieve their purpose. In this review, we present a compre-
hensive overview of LLM benchmarks for causality. We high-
light how recent benchmarks move towards a more thorough
definition of causal reasoning by incorporating interventional
or counterfactual reasoning. We derive a set of criteria that a
useful benchmark or set of benchmarks should aim to satisfy.
We hope this work will pave the way towards a general frame-
work for the assessment of causal understanding in LLMs and
the design of novel benchmarks.

Current LLMs can generally answer Type 1 questions effec-
tively due to their large repository of world knowledge, but
struggle to answer Type 2 and Type 3 questions, or can only
do so with extensive additional prompting strategies (Zhang
et al. 2023).
The ladder of causation (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018) di-
vides baseline-level causal reasoning into three rungs:

Introduction
The recent explosion in Large Language Models (LLMs) has
led to widespread consideration of their capabilities across a
spectrum of human endeavors (Srivastava et al. 2022). One
of these areas is causal inference, where multiple bench-
marks and tasks have been proposed in an attempt to gauge
LLM performance (Zeˇcevi´c et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023;
Gao et al. 2023). In this paper, we present a critical review
of these benchmarks. Building on existing “causal hierar-
chies” (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018), we taxonomise exist-
ing tasks into this hierarchy, highlighting how many of these
tasks only address the lowest level of ‘causal’ reasoning. We
then propose a set of criteria that a benchmark should fulfill
in order to be useful for evaluating an LLM’s causal reason-
ing capabilities.
Causal hierarchies. In this review, our goal is to propose
criteria that make a benchmark task suitable for evaluating
causal reasoning. We guide this by drawing upon existing
taxonomies and hierarchies of causal reasoning in the litera-
ture.
Zhang et al. (2023) propose a three-level hierarchy for as-
sessing the causal capabilities of an LLM:

• Rung 1: “seeing” - describing basic statistical associa-
tions, as defined by joint and conditional distributions
within the data.
Example: What is the relationship between this and that?
• Rung 2: “doing” - formalizing the concept of interven-
tions, traditionally phrased in terms of do-calculus.
Example: If I do this, what will happen?
• Rung 3: “imagining” - reasoning about alternative or
counterfactual scenarios, which may contradict what ac-
tually happened.
Example: If I had done this, what would have happened?

Again, many existing tasks only reach the first rung on the
ladder: they measure an LLM’s ability to identify associa-
tions, but do not introduce the higher-level concepts of Rung
2 and Rung 3 (Zeˇcevi´c et al. 2023). The ladder of causa-
tion aligns with the hierarchy from Zhang et al. (2023), and
both of them serve as a solid foundation for the discussion
of causal reasoning.

• Type 1: “Identifying causal relationships using domain
knowledge.”
Example: Person: I am balancing a glass of water on my
head. Suppose I take a quick step to the right. What will
happen to the glass?

Review of existing work, datasets and tasks

We surveyed the literature and explored repositories and
websites that host datasets relevant to causal reasoning in
large language models. Starting with review papers such as
Zeˇcevi´c et al. (2023) and Srivastava et al. (2022), we col-
lected a comprehensive list of existing datasets and tasks (39

Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence ( All rights reserved.

Benchmarks for lower levels of causal reasoning

We find that a significant proportion of existing tasks are
benchmarking ‘causal parrots’, failing to evaluate how well
LLMs are capable of causal reasoning and resorting to pre-
existing knowledge.
In-context causal relation identification and extrac-
tion. The first group of datasets used for assessing causal
reasoning capabilities consists of human-annotated causal
relations. In tasks built on these datasets, a context of facts
(such as real life events) or fantasy elements is provided.
Along with it, multiple choices of causal relations are pre-
sented to the LLM, or the LLM is asked to identify and select
the cause or effect event from its provided context.
Datasets along this line of research include MAVEN-
ERE,
e-CARE,
CausalTimeBank(Gao
et
al.
2023),
EventStoryLine (Caselli and Vossen 2017; Gao et al.
2023), Tuebingen cause-effect pairs dataset (Kıcıman et al.
2023),COPA (Gordon, Kozareva, and Roemmele 2012),
ChatGPT Causal Reasoning Evaluation, crass ai (Frohberg
and Binder 2021), causal judgment (Srivastava et al.
2022),Causal Discovery (Causal Parrots), and Knowledge
Base Facts) (Zeˇcevi´c et al. 2023). An example from (Gao
et al. 2023) is shown in Figure 1.
We argue here that performing well on such tasks does not
sufficiently demonstrate the causal reasoning ability of lan-
guage models. One reason is the inherent design of the tasks
as multiple-choice. The LLMs are given limited options to
choose from, sometimes only the two options ‘cause’ and
‘effect’. This lack of ‘open-endness’ restricts the evaluation
of whether LLMs can identify possibilities in a more abstract
sense. In other words, given that many of these datasets are
directly crafted from basic NLP tasks, by abusing the under-
lying correlation structure of the data, such as calculating
similarities between options and questions in a vector space
(e.g., cause-effects pairs in Wang et al. (2022)), LLMs can
achieve good performance without actually doing any causal
reasoning. If this is the case, the good performance could be
attributable to spurious language cues in the datasets, since
the underlying mechanism of identifying causal relation is
merely from the language used. Examples of simple word
replacements with less precise words in prompts (for exam-
ple ‘pets’ instead of ‘cats’ in questions about food to be fed
to the animal) led to a drop in performance (Li, Yu, and Et-
tinger 2022), contributing to this hypothesis.

Contextual reasoning and graph-based tasks move
towards more complex conceptions of causality
In light of the problems mentioned above, different ap-
proaches have emerged to evaluate LLMs in a way that
incorporates higher levels of causal reasoning. Recall that
the hierarchy from Zhang et al. (2023) described Type 2
as “Discovering new knowledge from data” and Type 3
as “Quantitatively estimating the consequences of actions”.
Meanwhile, Pearl and Mackenzie (2018) defined Rung 2
as “doing”—formalizing the concept of interventions, tra-
ditionally phrased in terms of do-calculus—and Rung 3 as
“imagining”—reasoning about alternative or counterfactual
scenarios, which may contradict what actually happened. In
this context, we therefore begin to see that a true causal
reasoning task should formalize the idea of interventional
and/or counterfactual reasoning, calling for the LLM to ap-
ply some level of abstraction or even imagination rather than
simple retrieval of domain knowledge.
Story-based contextual reasoning. Many tasks in this

Figure 1: An example of causal relation identification tasks.

Figure 2: Examples from com2sense (taken from Singh et al.
(2021) and Srivastava et al. (2022)).

Figure 3: An example from intuitive physics (Zeˇcevi´c et al.
2023).

group of datasets are about story-telling, such as Time-
Travel(Liu et al. 2023), FinCausal(Mariko et al. 2020), fan-
tasy reasoning(Srivastava et al. 2022), and minute mysteries
qa (Srivastava et al. 2022).
These tasks provide a more robust challenge for LLMs by
increasing the underlying level of complexity, requiring the
language model to evaluate a sequence of several events or
statements, discard irrelevant or misleading information, and
ultimately synthesize multiple factors to reach a reasonable
conclusion. An important innovation across several of these
tasks is the use of non-informative or even fictional elements
to preclude the application of domain knowledge retrieval.
Tasks such as minute mysteries qa (Srivastava et al. 2022)
tell a long-form story that with high probability does not ex-
ist in the LLM’s pretraining dataset, while fantasy reasoning
(Srivastava et al. 2022) extend this even further by telling a
fantasy story set in a different universe.
One concern with these tasks is the entanglement of ‘tem-
poral and spatial order” with causality in the sense that the
temporal or spatial order implies the causal relationship. The
fact that LLMs are performing well on this task may not be
surprising: if event B happens after event A, one may expect
LLMs to predict ‘A implies B’ option, even if the relation
is just correlative. This is a common problem across many
of these datasets, but is not necessarily alleviated just by in-

Many benchmarks suffer from key design issues

Unsuitable evaluation metrics. Although some tasks avoid
the above issues by prompting the LLM to explain causal
relationships (for example, the Causal Explanation Genera-
tion(CEG) task (Gao et al. 2023) which ask LLMs to gen-
erate explanations for causal relations between events (see
Figure 4), the inappropriate design of an evaluation method
can hurt the justification of causal reasoning capability of
LLMs. In CEG, standard NLP evaluation metrics like n-
grams or ROUGE-L (Wang et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023), de-
signed for evaluating how similar the generated explanation
is with the ‘ground truth’ explanation provided in the data,
are used to measure how ‘accurate’ the model-generated ex-
planation is. However, to claim a generated explanation ac-
curately reveals causality does not necessarily mean that it
has to be syntactically similar with the labeled sentence. Two
different sentences using very different words in different or-
der can still convey the same causal concept. Similar tasks
and datasets include CausalBank(Li et al. 2021), TimeTravel
(Liu et al. 2023). We also notice that some ‘ground truth’
explanations in these datasets seem to be incorrect as in e-
CARE (see for instance Figure 5). How to appropriately gen-
erate accurate causal explanations and evaluate them at large
scale is an open research question.

Figure 6: Examples from e-CARE of poor data quality.

Further, to the best of our understanding, the Forecasting
Subquestions task of BigBench evaluates the log-probability
assigned by human-generated questions that can be related
as ‘causes” or preliminary subquestions to another given
question where higher is better, but does not contain sub-
questions that are not causes of the question, where lower
is better. This prevents the assessment whether the subques-
tion is merely taking place before the question without any
causal relationship or is causally related to it.
Datasets and tasks that are not for causality.
It is
also of concern that some datasets are, in our opinion, not
even related to causal reasoning even though they are la-
beled so. Some datasets are directly crafted from NLP tasks
for assessing LLM language understanding. For example,
the BIGbench entailed polarity (Karttunen 2012; Srivastava
et al. 2022) task evaluates an LLM’s ability to detect en-
tailed polarities from implicative verbs, as shown in Figure
7. This is by no means a causal reasoning task. In (Yang

Figure 4: An example from CEG task.

Figure 5: Examples of incorrect ground-truth explanations
in e-CARE.

Inclusion of datasets or tasks in the training set. Sim-
ilar to the commonsense knowledge retrieval issue, another

Figure 7: Examples in Bigbench entailed polarity.

Some other datasets in BigBench, like the speech detec-
tion dataset (assessing whether a given figure of speech is
a simile, metaphor, pun, etc.),cause and effect, Indic cause
and effect (Srivastava et al. 2022) (mainly assessing lan-
guage translation), are assessing language understanding
rather than causal reasoning. We believe that these datasets
are inadequate for evaluating causal reasoning and should
hence be excluded for this purpose.

Conclusion and future work

We believe that building a reliable and robust assessment
framework for causal reasoning with LLMs is timely and
important. In this work, we collected and reviewed existing
datasets and tasks, and pointed out issues of certain datasets
in light of the three types of causal capabilities (Zhang
et al. 2023) and the ladder of causation(Pearl and Macken-
zie 2018). We highlight promising recent trends that present
a more satisfactory and holistic evaluation of causal rea-
soning. Ultimately, following the model of the widely pop-
ular General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE)
framework (Wang et al. 2018) for general NLP evaluation,
this work is a step towards the creation of a Causal Language
Understanding Evalution (CLUE) framework, consisting of
a minimal but exhaustive set of tasks that an LLM should
be able to complete in order to be considered successful at
causal reasoning.
Synthesizing across simpler and more complex tasks, we
note key commonalities that we believe a good benchmark
or set of benchmarks should possess. First, in the context
of the (Zhang et al. 2023) and (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018)
hierarchies, we argue that an effective benchmark must deal
with interventions and/or counterfactuals, being phrased
in causal rather than merely correlative language.
In addition, good performance of LLMs on existing tasks
may be accounted to their remarkable data-processing and
retrieval capabilities using billions of parameters as opposed
to their causal reasoning capabilities (Kaddour et al. 2023).
Some tasks offer multiple-choice answers to the LLM (Gao
et al. 2023; Gordon, Kozareva, and Roemmele 2012; Srivas-
tava et al. 2022), but this can enable the model to simply
calculate a measure of similarity between the options and
the initial premise. A good benchmark should therefore be
open-ended rather than multiple choice.

References
Caselli, T.; and Vossen, P. 2017. The event storyline corpus:
A new benchmark for causal and temporal relation extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the Events and Stories in the News
Workshop, 77–86.
Frohberg, J.; and Binder, F. 2021. Crass: A novel data set
and benchmark to test counterfactual reasoning of large lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11941.
Gao, J.; Ding, X.; Qin, B.; and Liu, T. 2023.
Is Chat-
GPT a Good Causal Reasoner? A Comprehensive Evalua-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07375.
Gordon, A.; Kozareva, Z.; and Roemmele, M. 2012.
SemEval-2012 task 7: Choice of plausible alternatives: An
evaluation of commonsense causal reasoning.
In * SEM
2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings of the main confer-
ence and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the
Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Se-
mEval 2012), 394–398.
Jin, Z.; Liu, J.; Lyu, Z.; Poff, S.; Sachan, M.; Mihalcea, R.;
Diab, M.; and Sch¨olkopf, B. 2023. Can Large Language
Models Infer Causation from Correlation? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.05836.
Kaddour, J.; Harris, J.; Mozes, M.; Bradley, H.; Raileanu,
R.; and McHardy, R. 2023. Challenges and applications of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10169.
Karttunen, L. 2012. Simple and phrasal implicatives. In *
SEM 2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
putational Semantics–Volume 1: Proceedings of the main
conference and the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings
of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2012), 124–131.
Kıcıman, E.; Ness, R.; Sharma, A.; and Tan, C. 2023. Causal
reasoning and large language models: Opening a new fron-
tier for causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00050.
Lal, Y. K.; Chambers, N.; Mooney, R.; and Balasubrama-
nian, N. 2021. Tellmewhy: A dataset for answering why-
questions in narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06132.
Li, J.; Yu, L.; and Ettinger, A. 2022. Counterfactual reason-
ing: Do Language Models need world knowledge for causal
inference? In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Neuro Causal and
Symbolic AI (nCSI).
Li, Z.; Ding, X.; Liu, T.; Hu, J. E.; and Van Durme, B.
2021. Guided generation of cause and effect. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.09846.