Michael Fuest, Pingchuan Ma, Ming Gui, Johannes Schusterbauer, Vincent Tao Hu, Bj¨orn Ommer

Abstract—Diffusion Models are popular generative modeling methods in various vision tasks, attracting significant attention. They can
be considered a unique instance of self-supervised learning methods due to their independence from label annotation. This survey
explores the interplay between diffusion models and representation learning. It provides an overview of diffusion models’ essential
aspects, including mathematical foundations, popular denoising network architectures, and guidance methods. Various approaches
related to diffusion models and representation learning are detailed. These include frameworks that leverage representations learned
from pre-trained diffusion models for subsequent recognition tasks and methods that utilize advancements in representation and
self-supervised learning to enhance diffusion models. This survey aims to offer a comprehensive overview of the taxonomy between
diffusion models and representation learning, identifying key areas of existing concerns and potential exploration. Github link:

arXiv:2407.00783v1 [cs.CV] 30 Jun 2024

Index Terms—deep generative modeling, diffusion models, denoising diffusion models, score-based models, image generation,
representation learning.

✦

1
INTRODUCTION

Diffusion Models [68, 151, 154] have recently emerged as
the state-of-the-art of generative modeling, demonstrating
remarkable results in image synthesis [43, 67, 68, 141] and
across other modalities including natural language [9, 70, 77,
101], computational chemistry [6, 71] and audio synthesis
[80, 92, 109]. The remarkable generative capabilities of Dif-
fusion Models suggest that Diffusion Models learn both low
and high-level features of their input data, potentially mak-
ing them well-suited for general representation learning.
Unlike other generative models like Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [22, 53, 84] and Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [88, 137], diffusion models do not contain fixed archi-
tectural components that capture data representations [124].
This makes diffusion model-based representation learning
challenging. Nevertheless, approaches leveraging diffusion
models for representation learning have seen increasing
interest, simultaneously driven by advancements in training
and sampling of Diffusion Models.
Current state-of-the-art self-supervised representation
learning approaches [8, 24, 33, 55] have demonstrated great
scalability. It is thus likely that diffusion models exhibit
similar scaling properties [159]. Controlled generation ap-
proaches like Classifier Guidance [43] and Classifier-free
Guidance [67] used to obtain state-of-the-art generation
results rely on annotated data, which represents a bottle-
neck for scaling up diffusion models. Guidance approaches
that leverage representation learning and that are thus
annotation-free offer a solution, potentially enabling dif-

Fig. 1. Shows yearly numbers of both published and preprint papers on
diffusion models and representation learning. For 2024, the green bar
indicates the number of papers collected up to and including June 2024,
and the dashed grey bar indicates the projected number for the whole
year.

∀t ∈{1, . . . , T},
(1)

where T denotes the number of diffusion timesteps, βt
is a time-dependent variance schedule and I is an identity
matrix with dimensionality equal to x0 [37]. Note that other
parametrizations of the transition kernel p(xt|xt−1) are also
applicable in the same manner [87, 188]. We proceed with
the parametrization used in DDPMs [68] to simplify the dis-
cussion moving forward. A noisy image xt can be sampled
directly from x0 with the help of a reparametrization trick
[151] as follows:

p(xt|x0) = N

xt; √¯αtx0; (1 −¯αt)I

,
(2)

where αt := 1 −βt and ¯αt := Qt
i=1 αi. Given the
original input image x0, we can now obtain xt in one step
by sampling Gaussian vector ϵt ∼N(0, I) and applying:

xt = √¯αtx0 +
p

(1 −¯αt)ϵt.
(3)

•
Comprehensive Overview: Offers a thorough survey
of the interplay between diffusion models and repre-
sentation learning, providing clarity on how diffu-
sion models can be used for representation learning
and vice versa.

We can generate novel samples from p(x0) starting
from a pure noise image xT
∼
π(xT )
=
N(0, I)
with dimensionality equivalent to the data and sequen-
tially denoise it such that at every step, pθ(xt−1|xt) =
N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t)). In practice, this requires train-
ing a neural network pθ(xt−1|xt) that predicts the mean
µ0(xt, t) and the covariance Σθ(xt, t) given a diffusion
timestep t and the noisy input image xt [172]. Training
this neural network with a maximum likelihood objective
is intractable [37], so the objective is amended to minimize
a Variational Lower-Bound of the Negative Log-Likelihood
instead [68, 151]:

•
Taxonomy of Approaches: We introduce a taxonomy
of current approaches in diffusion-based represen-
tation learning, categorizing and highlighting com-
monalities and differences among them.

•
Generalized Frameworks: The paper derives gener-
alized frameworks for both diffusion model feature
extraction and assignment-based guidance, offering
a structured view on a large number of works on
diffusion models and representation learning.

•
Future Directions: We identify key opportunities
for further progress in the field, encouraging the
exploration of diffusion models and flow matching
as a new state-of-the-art in representation learning.

Lvlb = −log pθ(x0|x1) + DKL (p(xT |x0)∥π(xT ))

t>1
DKL (p(xt−1|xt, x0)∥pθ(xt−1|xt)) ,
(4)

+
X

where DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. This
objective ensures that the neural network is trained to
minimize the distance between pθ(xt−1|xt) and the true
posterior of the forward process when conditioned on x0.
The denoising network is generally applied to parametrize
the reverse mean µθ(x, t) of the distribution of the reverse
transition pθ(xt−1|xt) := N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t)) [27].
The true value of the reverse mean is a function of x0, which
is unknown in the reverse process and must therefore be
estimated using input timestep t and the noisy data xt.
Specifically, the reverse mean is formulated as the following:

2
BACKGROUND

The following section outlines the required mathematical
foundations of diffusion models. We also highlight current
architecture backbones of diffusion models and provide a
brief overview of sampling methods and conditional gener-
ation approaches.

2.1
Mathematical Foundations

µ(xt, t) :=
√¯αt−1(1 −¯αt−1)xt + √¯αt−1(1 −αt)x0

1 −¯αt
,
(5)

Fig. 2. Left: Shows qualitative generation results from diffusion models conditioned using self-supervised guidance signals. Right: Shows qualitative
results of downstream image tasks that leverage representations learned in training diffusion models. Adapted from Li et al. [100], Hu et al. [73],
Pan et al. [130], Baranchuk et al. [15], Yang and Wang [173].

[68] suggest fixing the covariance Σθ(xt, t) to a constant
value, which enables rewriting the parametrized reverse
mean as a function of the added noise ϵ(xt, t) instead of
x0:

discrete timesteps. Here, the diffusion process is expressed
as a continuous time-dependent function σ(t). Noise is
gradually added whenever a sample x moves forward
in time, and gradually removed if the image follows the
reverse trajectory. More specifically, the diffusion process
can be expressed using an Itˆo Stochastic Differential Equa-
tion (SDE) [83], where the vector-valued drift coefficient
f(·, t) : Rd →Rd and the scalar-valued diffusion coefficient
g(·) : R →R need to be selected when implementing a
diffusion model:


xt −1 −αt
√1 −¯αt
ϵθ(xt, t).

(6)

µθ(xt, t) =
1
√αt

This reparametrization allows for the derivation of a
simplification of the objective Lvlb which we denote Lsimple
that measures the distance between the predicted noise
ϵθ(xt, t) and the actual noise ϵt as follows:

dx = f(x, t)dt + g(t)dw,
(9)

Lsimple = Et∼[1,T ]Ex0∼p(x0)Eϵt∼N(0,I) ∥ϵt −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2 .
(7)
Instead of predicting the mean and covariance directly,
the network is now parametrized to predict the added noise
for a diffusion timestep and noisy image input. The reverse
mean is obtained using Equation 6, and the covariance is
fixed. Noise prediction networks have the benefit of being
able to recover xt−1 from xt in the final sampling stages
by predicting zero noise [79]. This is more difficult for direct
parametrizations of ˆx0. There is therefore a tradeoff between
the two, where direct parametrizations can be more bene-
ficial for very noisy inputs in the initial sampling stages,
and noise prediction parametrization can be beneficial in
the latter sampling stages [27].
In efforts to improve sampling efficiency, Salimans and
Ho [143] introduce velocity prediction as a further alterna-
tive parametrization. Velocity is a linear combination of the
denoised input and the added noise, commonly defined as:

where w is the standard Wiener process. There are two
widely used choices of the SDE formulation used to model
the diffusion process. The first is the Variance-Preserving
(VP) SDE, used in the work of Ho et al. [68] which is
given by f(x, t) = −1

2β(t)x and g(t) =
p

β(t), where
β(t) = βt as T goes to infinity. Note that this is equivalent to
the continuous formulation of the DDPM parametrization
in Equation 1. The second is the Variance-Exploding (VE)
SDE [153], resulting from a choice of f(x, t) = 0 and

g(t) =
q

2σ(t) dσ(t)

dt . The VE SDE gets its name since the
variance continually increases with increasing t, whereas the
variance in the VP SDE is bounded [154]. Anderson [7] de-
rives an SDE that reverses a diffusion process, which results
in the following when applied to the Variance Exploding
SDE:

r

dx = −2σ(t)dσ(t)

2σ(t)dσ(t)

dt
∇x log p(x; σ(t)) dt +

dt
dw.

v = ¯αtϵ −(1 −¯αt)xt.
(8)

(10)
∇x log p(x; σ(t)) is known as the score function. This
score function is generally not known, so it needs to be
approximated using a neural network. A neural network
D(x; σ) that minimizes the L2-denoising error can be used
to extract the score function since ∇x log p(x; σ(t))
=
D(x;σ)−x

Fig. 3. Left: An exemplary visualization of the U-Net architecture [140]. Consists of an encoder and a decoder, with residual connections that
preserve gradient flow and low-level input details. Adapted from [135]. Right: An exemplary visualization of the DiT architecture. Shows the high-
level architecture, as well as a breakdown of the adaLN-Zero DiT block. Adapted from Peebles and Xie [132].

2.2
Backbone Architectures

TABLE 1
An overview of different diffusion model guidance approaches.
Self-guidance [75] and [73] are both classifier and annotation-free, and
online guidance facilitates online learning.

Approach
Classifier-Free
Annotation-Free
Online Learning

Classifier Guidance [42]
✗
✗
✗
Classifier-free Guidance [67]
✓
✗
✗
Self-guidance [75, 100]
✓
✓
✗
Online guidance [73]
✓
✓
✓

into a sequence of tokens using a ”patchify” layer. After
adding ViT-style positional embeddings to all input tokens,
the tokens are fed through a series of transformer blocks.
These blocks are equivalent to standard ViT blocks that
take additional conditional information such as the diffusion
timestep t and a conditioning signal c as inputs. A detailed
overview of their structure can be seen in Fig 3.
U-ViTs [12] combine the U-Net and ViT backbones into a
unified backbone. U-ViTs follow the design methodology
of transformers in tokenizing time, conditioning and im-
age inputs, but additionally employ long skip connections
between shallow and deep layers. These skip connections
provide shortcuts for low-level features and therefore sta-
bilize training of the denoising network [12]. Works utiliz-
ing U-ViT-based backbones [13, 72] achieve results on par
with U-Net CNN-based architectures, demonstrating their
potential as a viable alternative to other denoising network
backbones.

2.3
Diffusion Model Guidance

3
METHODS

Having covered the main preliminaries for diffusion mod-
els, we outline a series of methods related to diffusion
models and representation learning in the following sec-
tion. In subsection 3.1 we describe and categorize current
frameworks utilizing representations learned by pre-trained
diffusion models for downstream recognition tasks. In sub-
section 3.2, we describe methods that leverage advances in
representation learning to improve diffusion models them-
selves.

∇xt log (pθ(xt)pϕ(c|xt)) = ∇xt log pθ(xt)+∇xt log pϕ(c|xt).
(11)
By using Bayes’ theorem, the noise prediction network
can then be rewritten to estimate:

3.1
Diffusion Models for Representation Learning

ˆϵθ(xt, c) = ϵθ(xt, c) −wσt∇xt log pϕ(c|xt),
(12)

Learning useful representations is one of the main moti-
vations for designing architectures like VAEs [88, 89] and
GANs [22, 84]. Contrastive learning approaches, where the
goal is to learn a feature space in which representations of
similar images are very close together, and vice versa for
dissimilar images (e.g. SimCLR [34], MoCo [60]), have also
led to significant advances in representation learning. These
contrastive methods are not fully self-supervised however,
since they require supervision in the form of augmentations
that preserve the original content of the image.
Diffusion models offer a promising alternative to these
approaches. While diffusion models are primarily designed
for generation tasks, the denoising process encourages the
learning of semantic image representations [15], that can
be used for downstream recognition tasks. The diffusion
model learning process is similar to the learning process of
Denoising Autoencoders (DAE) [18, 162], which are trained
to reconstruct images corrupted by adding noise. The main
difference is that diffusion models additionally take the
diffusion timestep t as input, and can thus be viewed as
multi-level DAEs with different noise scales [169]. Since
DAEs learn meaningful representations in the compressed
latent space, it is intuitive that diffusion models exhibit
similar representation learning capabilities. We outline and
discuss current approaches in the following section.

where the parameter w modulates the strength of the
conditioning signal. Classifier guidance is a versatile ap-
proach that increases sample quality, but it is heavily reliant
on the availability of a noise-robust pre-trained classifier,
which in turn relies on the availability of annotated data,
which is not available in many applications.
To
address
this
limitation,
Classifier-free
guidance
(CFG) [67] eliminates the need for a pre-trained classifier.
CFG works by training an unconditional diffusion model
parametrized by ϵθ(xt, t, ϕ) together with a conditional
model parametrized by ϵθ(xt, t, c). For the unconditional
model, a null input token ϕ is used as a conditioning signal
c. The network is trained by randomly dropping out the
conditioning signal with probability puncond. Sampling is
then performed using a weighted combination of condi-
tional and unconditional score estimates:

˜ϵθ(xt, c) = (1 + w)ϵθ(xt, c) −wϵθ(xt, ϕ).
(13)

Paradigm
Downstream Task
Method

Classification
Generative Augmentation [10]

MA-ZSC [150]

Generative Augmentation

Semantic Segmentation
ScribbleGen [148]

GDC [125]
DifFormer [126]

Classification

DDAE [169]

Semantic Segmentation
DDPM-Seg [15]

VDM [187]

Panoptic Segmentation
ODISE [170]

DIFT [157]
SD+DINO [183]
Diffusion Hyperfeatures [116]

Leveraging Intermediate Activations

Semantic Correspondence

SD4Match [103]

USCSD [62]

Depth Estimation
VDM [187]

Image Editing
P2PCAC [65]
Plug-and-Play Diffusion Features [160]

SODA [82]

Classification

l-DAE [35]
DiffMAE [166]

Semantic Segmentation
MDM [130]

Diffusion Model Reconstruction

Image Editing
DiffAE [134]

PDAE [186]

Image Interpolation
InfoDiffusion [165]
SmoothDiffusion [58]

DiffusionClassifier [95]

Diffusion Model Knowledge Transfer
Classification

RepFusion [173]
DreamTeacher [96]

Joint Diffusion Models
Classification
JDM [40]
HybViT [174]

Semantic Segmentation
ADDP [158]

S
X

L
X

l=1
wl,sBl(rl,s),
(14)

s=0

where L is the number of layers, S is a subsample
of the number of diffusion timesteps and r is an activa-
tion feature map. Bottleneck layers and mixing weights
are finetuned on the specific downstream task. Similar to
previous approaches, Diffusion Hyperfeatures is used for
semantic correspondence. The authors extract activations
from Stable-Diffusion and tune the aggregation network on
a subset of SPair-71k. Diffusion Hyperfeatures outperforms
models that use self-supervised descriptors or supervised
hypercolumns on the SPair-71k and CUB datasets.
Hedlin et al. [62] focus on optimizing the prompt embed-
dings by exploiting intermediate attention maps specifically.
Given a certain input text prompt, these attention activation
maps correspond to the semantics of the prompt. Instead
of optimizing a global or a class-dependent prompt embed-
ding Θ using the semantic loss, Hedlin et al. [62] optimize
the embedding to maximize the cross-attention at the loca-
tion of interest. Locating corresponding points in a second
image then comes down to conditioning on the optimized
prompt, and selecting the point with the pixel attaining
the maximum attention map value within the target image.
Note that this approach does not utilize supervised training
specific to semantic correspondence. However, they require
test-time optimization which is costly. Text prompts are
optimized using an off-the-shelf diffusion model without
fine-tuning. Several further works building on aforemen-
tioned approaches [120, 184] exist, showing that exploiting
pre-trained diffusion models for semantic correspondence
remains a promising application of diffusion models.
Zhao et al. [187] propose Visual Perception with a pre-
trained Diffusion Model (VDM), a framework closely re-
lated to USCSD [62] that employs a text feature refinement
network as well as an additional recognition encoder for
semantic segmentation and depth estimation. Here, the de-
noising network is fed with refined text representations as
well as an input image, and the resulting feature maps as
well as the cross-attention maps between the text and image
features are used to provide guidance for a decoder. To
achieve this, the prediction model is written as pϕ(y|x, S),
where S represents the set of all category labels of the
downstream task. The prediction model is implemented as
the following:

3.1.2
A general representation extraction framework
Many of the methods outlined in the previous section follow
a similar procedure in leveraging learned representations of
pre-trained diffusion models for downstream vision tasks.
In this section, we aim to consolidate these approaches to a
common three-step framework. We do this to provide clarity
on the relationship between diffusion models and their use
for downstream predictive tasks. To leverage intermediate
activations for downstream tasks, a selection methodology
that outputs the ideal diffusion timestep input as well as the
intermediate layer number(s) whose activation maps have
the highest predictive performance when upsampled and
linearly probed must be applied. This can be a trainable
model [116], a grid search procedure [169] or a learning
agent [173]. The goal of this methodology is generally to
select timestep t ∈T and a set of decoder block numbers
B that maximize predictive performance on a downstream
task. Given a set of possible timesteps T and a set of decoder
blocks B, the goal is to find:

pϕ(y|x, S) = pϕ3(y|F)pϕ2(F|x, C)pϕ1(C|S),
(15)

(t∗, B∗) = arg
min
t∈T,B⊆B Ldiscr(t, B)
(16)

Fig. 4. A high-level overview of a framework for extracting representations from pre-trained diffusion models for downstream tasks.

representation and z is the student model representation.
The distance between the two is minimized during training
using a loss function Lkd. After the distillation, the student
network is reapplied as a feature extractor and fine-tuned
on the available task labels. Previous approaches for using
diffusion model representations rely on grid-search to deter-
mine which diffusion timestep to use for feature extraction.
Here, the authors formulate a reinforcement learning envi-
ronment where the action space is the set of all possible
timesteps t available for selection, and the reward function
is the negative task loss −Ltask(y, g(z(t); θg)). Given the
input x, a policy network πθπ(t|x) is trained to determine
which timestep t to use for representation extraction. Once
the timestep is selected, the authors use the feature represen-
tations in the mid-block of the DPM for the selected timestep
t∗to obtain z(t∗). After the distillation phase, the student
network is used as a feature extractor and subsequently fine-
tuned on the task label y.
Li et al. [96] introduce DreamTeacher, a knowledge distil-
lation method using a feature regressor module that distills
the learned representations of a generative model G into a
target image recognition backbone f. Given a feature dataset
D = {xi, f g
i }N
i=1 consisting of images x and extracted
features f g
i , f is trained by distilling f g
i into the intermediate
features of f(xi). The features are extracted from G by
running a forward diffusion process for T timesteps and
conducting a single denoising step to extract f g
i from the
intermediate layers of the U-Net backbone. The extracted
features are distilled using a feature regressor module with
a top-down architecture containing lateral skip connections
that aligns the image backbone features with the generative
features. Intermediate CNN encoder features f e
l at layers
l and regressor outputs f r
l are used to compute an MSE
feature regression loss inspired by FitNet [139]:

high-level features corresponding to structural elements and
shapes, whereas generative tasks mapping random noise to
images will require the computation of lower-level features.
The ideal intermediate layer number as well as the optimal
diffusion timestep will largely depend on the exact down-
stream prediction task, the dataset, and the architecture of
the diffusion model used.
Once the ideal timestep and layer number are deter-
mined, an input image and the selected diffusion timestep
are passed to the diffusion model, and the intermediate acti-
vations in the selected decoder blocks computed in the for-
ward pass are extracted and generally concatenated and pre-
processed depending on the downstream task (e.g. through
upsampling, pooling, etc.). Finally, a classification head is
trained on the annotated dataset, taking the preprocessed
features extracted from the diffusion model as input. This
classification head can be an MLP, a CNN, or an attention-
based network depending on the availability of labeled data
and predictive performance on the dataset. The diffusion
model weights are usually frozen in this probing process,
but additional fine-tuning regimes can increase discrimina-
tive performance for certain datasets and architectures (see
e.g., Xiang et al. [169]). Fig. 4 shows an overview of the
generalized framework.

L
X

LMSE = 1

l=1
∥f r
l −W(f e
l )∥2
2
(17)

L

T
X

L(ν, ψ, ω) = Lclass(ν, ω)−L0(ν, ψ)−

t=2
Lt,diff(ν, ψ)−LT (ν, ψ).

JDM also enables a simplification of classifier guidance.
By applying the classifier to noisy images xt, the classifier
is effectively augmented to be robust to noise. To guide the
generated sample towards a target label, representations Zt
are optimized according to the classifier gradient, giving
Z′
t = Zt −α∇zt log gω(y|Zt). JDM achieves state-of-the-
art performance for joint models on CIFAR and CelebA
datasets, outperforming HybViT.
Tian et al. [158] propose the Alternating Denoising Diffu-
sion Process (ADDP). ADDP alternately denoises pixels and
VQ tokens. Given an image x0, a pre-trained VQ Encoder
[26] maps time image to VQ tokens z0. The alternating
diffusion process masks regions of z0 with a Markov chain
according to diffusion timestep t, producing zt. Unreliable
tokens ¯zt are generated by a token predictor and fed into a
VQ Decoder to synthesize xt, replacing the masked regions
of z0. A pixel-to-token generation network is then trained
to approximate the distribution of ¯zt−1. During sampling,
ADDP starts with a representation of pure unreliable tokens
¯zT and iteratively denoises the token sequence by predicting
¯zt−1. For recognition, the representations learned by the
pixel-to-token generation network can be forwarded to dif-
ferent task-specific recognition heads. ADDP with the VQ-
GAN tokenizer [47] MAGE-Large [99] token predictor and
ViT-Large [45] pixel-to-token encoder, outperforms previous
unified models in image classification, object detection, se-
mantic segmentation, and unconditional generation.

(
G(z; ϕ(x))
if p ≤p0
x
otherwise,
(18)

T0(x) =

3.2
Representation Learning for Diffusion Model Guid-
ance

Despite the remarkable performance of generative mod-
els, there exists a gap in quality between conditional and
unconditional image generation approaches [25]. This is
especially the case for GANs [53], which suffer from mode
collapse when trained in a fully unsupervised setting [110].
Unconditional GANs often fail to accurately model multi-
modal distributions, e.g. not being able to generate all digits
for MNIST [110]. Class-conditional GANs [22] [123] miti-
gate this issue, but require labeled data. Recent approaches
like self-conditioned GANs [110] and instance-conditioned
GANs [25] attempt to train conditional GANs without re-
quiring labeled data, and are able to achieve competitive
generation results.
Diffusion models have since surpassed the image gen-
eration capabilities of GANs [42], but suffer from a simi-
lar performance discrepancy between conditional and fully
self-supervised approaches. Current state-of-the-art diffu-
sion models are conditional models that rely on guidance
approaches that also require annotated data. Self-supervised
guidance approaches can leverage much larger unlabeled
datasets for pre-training, and thus have the potential to tran-
scend current image generation approaches. One intuitive
approach for leveraging representation learning to facilitate
these guidance methods is to explore methods that assign
labels to unlabeled data, e.g. through clustering and clas-
sification approaches. We introduce several approaches in
the following section. Fig. 5 shows a proposed taxonomy of
representation learning techniques for diffusion guidance.

Fig. 5. A hierarchical overview of current diffusion model training frameworks that leverage representation learning techniques for conditional
generation and guidance.

3.2.2
A generalized framework for assignment-based guid-
ance
Assignment-based guidance approaches all rely on assign-
ing annotation to inputs during training, which enables
controlled generation during inference when conditioning
on this annotation. We therefore propose to formulate a
generalized framework that encapsulates all assignment-
based guidance approaches discussed here. This framework
consists of three main components. The first is a self-
supervised image encoder E(x), that maps inputs to a low-
dimensional feature representation z. Using a multi-modal
feature extractor like CLIP has the advantage of enabling
text-based as well as image-based conditioning, but other
feature extractors can be used, provided they generate se-
mantically meaningful image representations.
The second is a self-annotation function f(z), which uses
the image representation to produce annotation c for input
image x. In the simplest case, this self-annotation function
is an external pre-trained image classifier that generates
pseudo-class labels from image representations, similar to
the approach employed in DPT [176], where the external
classifier is subsequently re-trained on the conditionally
generated images. In other cases, the self-annotation func-
tion is a retrieval model, which uses a distance function d
to retrieve images similar to the training image, and uses
representations of the retrieved images for generating the
guidance signal c.
The final component is a denoising network Dθ(xt, c, t),
which takes the noisy image xt, the diffusion timestep t and
the guidance signal c as input, and denoises the image. Dur-
ing inference, controlled generation is enabled by passing an
initial guidance signal k (which can be multi-modal as long
as the embedding space of the encoder E is shared between
modalities) through the encoder to generate representation
z = E(k). The conditioning signal c is then generated by
passing z to the self-annotation function f where c = f(z).
Passing xt, c and t to the denoising network Dθ now enables
synthesis of novel images semantically similar to the initial
guidance signal k.
One of the main motivations behind the design of
assignment-based guidance methods is the reliance on exist-
ing methods on labeled data. While it could be argued that
the aforementioned assignment-based guidance approaches
are indirectly reliant on annotated data through the pre-
trained image encoder, it is important to note that this
encoder can be replaced with a fully self-supervised encoder
as well. CLIP relies on the availability of a large-scale dataset
of image-caption pairs and is thus not fully self-supervised,
but other representation learning methods are also able to
generate semantic representations. CLIP is used in many
approaches to facilitate both text prompt-based and image
conditioning during inference, which may no longer be pos-
sible when using primarily image-based feature extractors.
A summary of the training and inference methodology can
be found in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6. A generalization of assignment-based guidance training and sampling pipelines. Samples are conditioned on annotations generated by a
self-annotation function f, using features extracted by a pre-trained image encoder (e.g., CLIP [136]).

between weak and strong depth predictors, guiding the
generation process using the gradient of Ldc with respect to
xt in a methodology similar to [42]. Depth prior guidance
employs an additional small-resolution diffusion U-Net on
the depth domain, adding noise to depth predictions and
using a denoising objective Ldp. The gradient of Ldp is
treated like an external classifier gradient and added to
the image generation objective. Combining both methods
during training results in enhanced depth semantics in
generated images.
Perturbed Attention Guidance (PAG) [3] is a sampling
guidance method that improves generation quality for both
conditional and unconditional settings. PAG does not re-
quire additional training or external pre-trained models.
Instead, Ahn et al. [3] introduce an implicit discriminator
D that differentiates between desirable and undesirable
samples during the diffusion process, where y is a desirable
and ˆy is an undesirable sample. The diffusion sampling
process is then redefined to incorporate the derivative of
the discriminator loss LD. The score with undesirable label
ˆy cannot be approximated using the existing denoising net-
work ϵθ(xt). Thus the score is estimated by perturbing the
forward pass of a pre-trained denoising network, denoted
by ˆϵθ. PAG works by perturbing the self-attention maps in
the diffusion U-Net, replacing them with an identity matrix
to guide the sampling process away from degraded samples.
The final noise prediction is obtained by feeding xt into
both ϵθ(·) and ˆϵθ(·) to get the final noise prediction ˜ϵθ.
PAG improves generation quality in both conditional and
unconditional settings, and can be combined with existing
guidance methods like classifier guidance.

4
CHALLENGES & FUTURE DIRECTIONS

4.1
General Challenges

4.2
Potential Future Directions

In many works discussed, the quality of representations
learned by diffusion models is evaluated indirectly using
task-specific metrics from auxiliary models. Interpretability
and disentanglement are other important ways to evaluate
representation efficacy and are currently underexplored.
Methods enhancing the interpretability of the latent space
can improve generation control and benefit a wide range
of recognition tasks. We look towards methods on inter-
pretable direction discovery as have been proposed for
GANs in [163] for inspiration, and see similar approaches
for diffusion models as promising. While there are some re-
cent works focusing on disentangled and interpretable rep-
resentation learning in diffusion models (e.g., [28, 93, 180]),
we feel that this area remains underserved.
Current diffusion-based representation learning frame-
works use U-Net and DiT backbones, which were primarily
designed for generative tasks. Developing novel architec-
tures tailored for representation learning is a promising
area of research. Current transformer-based backbones are
popular due to their scalability and performance, but their
inability for parallel inference and the quadratic complexity
of the attention mechanism are significant downsides, lim-
iting their use for high-resolution images and long videos
[76]. Techniques like windowing [112], sliding [16], and ring
attention [108] help mitigate these issues, but complexity
limitations remain. Recent works [49, 76, 171] have begun to
utilize state-space diffusion models [56, 127], which offer
linear complexity with respect to token sequence length,
and are thus well suited to long token sequence mod-
eling for both text [121] and images/video [29, 97]. The
representation-learning capabilities of these models are yet
to be fully analyzed, but we expect that conclusions drawn
from diffusion models can also be applied to state-space
models and their representation learning capabilities.
We also see significant room for further research in
using other generative models for representation learning.
Flow Matching models [5, 107, 111] have recently gained
prominence for their ability to maintain straight trajecto-
ries during generation. This characteristic results in faster
inference, making Flow Matching a suitable alternative for
addressing trajectory issues encountered in diffusion mod-
els. Their versatility has been demonstrated across various
applications, including image [38, 78], video [39], depth [57],
human motion [74], audio [94], boosting diffusion mod-
els [50, 147, 156], and even text generation [77]. The close
relationship between Diffusion and Flow Matching models
suggests that many of the diffusion representation learning
frameworks can also be applied to Flow Matching models.

Pingchuan Ma is a Ph.D. student in the Com-
puter Vision & Learning Group at Ludwig Maxi-
milian University of Munich (LMU) and a Munich
Center for Machine Learning (MCML) member.
He previously received his master’s degree in
Applied Computer Science from Heidelberg Uni-
versity, where he developed an interest in deep
metric learning and style transfer. He served as
a reviewer for CVPR 2024 and NeurIPS 2024.
His current research focuses on leveraging gen-
erative models for tasks beyond generation and
exploring multi-modality representation learning.

Ming Gui is currently a PhD researcher at the
Computer Vision & Learning Group at Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich (LMU). He re-
ceived his bachelor’s and master’s degree in
electrical and computational engineering from
the Technical University of Munich, where he de-
veloped interest in deep learning and computer
vision. His research is presently centered around
the development and enhancement of scalable
generative models.

Johannes Schusterbauer is a PhD Student at
the University of Munich’s Computer Vision &
Learning Group. He did his undergraduate stud-
ies in Psychology and Computer Science, both
at the University of Munich, followed by a Mas-
ter’s degree in Intelligent Interactive Systems
from Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona. Be-
sides works in the field of generative modeling,
Johannes’ research focuses on the adaptability
of Diffusion and Flow-based models for general
image understanding.