General-Purpose Multicore Architectures

Saugata Ghose

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, United States

arXiv:2408.12999v2 [cs.AR] 25 Jan 2025

Abstract

The first years of the 2000s led to an inflection point in computer architectures: while the
number of available transistors on a chip continued to grow, crucial transistor scaling prop-
erties started to break down and result in increasing power consumption, while aggressive
single-core performance optimizations were resulting in diminishing returns due to inherent
limits in instruction-level parallelism. This led to the rise of multicore CPU architectures,
which are now commonplace in modern computers at all scales. In this chapter, we discuss
the evolution of multicore CPUs since their introduction. Starting with a historic overview of
multiprocessing, we explore the basic microarchitecture of a multicore CPU, key challenges
resulting from shared memory resources, operating system modifications to optimize multi-
core CPU support, popular metrics for multicore evaluation, and recent trends in multicore
CPU design.

1
Introduction

From the first commercial microprocessors in the 1970s through the end of the 1990s, micropro-
cessors available on the market typically consisted of a single CPU core per chip. During that
time, significant architectural advancements were made to improve the performance of the CPU
core, including (but not limited to) techniques such as out-of-order processing and superscalar ex-
ecution that extracted instruction-level parallelism (ILP) from single-thread sequential programs.
These architectural advancements were driven by two trends that governed advances in semi-
conductor manufacturing process technologies. The first, Moore’s Law [62], was an observation
made in 1965 by Gordon Moore that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit (IC) dou-
bled every year, which he revised in 1975 [63] to forecast a doubling every two years after 1980.
Figure 1 shows a progression of Moore’s Law, using real CPUs as examples, between 1971 and
2024. The second, Dennard scaling [13,14], was a relationship identified by Robert Dennard and
his colleagues at IBM in the early 1970s, identifying that with every new manufacturing process
technology node (an approximately 18-month interval at the time), both the area and the power
consumption of a single transistor was half of what was observed in the previous generation.
As Moore’s Law and Dennard Scaling made it more economical to increase the number of
transistors on a chip (effectively providing double the number of transistors, at the same area
and power budget, every 18–24 months), manufacturers dedicated these additional transistors

1000B

Apple M1 Ultra

Transistor Count

DEC Alpha 21164 EV5

1B

Motorola 68000

Intel Itanium 2 9050

1M

Intel 80486

1000

Intel 4004

1

1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025

Year of Release

Figure 1: Log–linear plot of selected CPUs introduced between 1971 and 2024, illustrating the
progression of Moore’s Law.

towards increasing the performance of the single CPU core. Unfortunately, two critical factors
made it difficult to keep continuing this trend. First, as the “free” rewards of scaling started to
break down in the early 2000s, the areal power density (directly correlated to the amount of heat
dissipated per unit area) of high-end CPUs began growing rapidly [11, 25]. Then-contemporary
projections estimated that if single-core CPU development continued along the trends of the time,
commonplace passive cooling elements would no longer be able to dissipate the heat generated
by the CPU [11]. Second, more aggressive techniques for ILP were yielding diminishing returns,
requiring high hardware costs for meager performance benefits [74]. These factors forced man-
ufacturers to reconsider how to use additional transistors to continue to deliver performance
improvements, now in a power-efficient manner [11,20,74].
This reconsideration led to the widespread adoption of multicore CPUs (also known as chip
multiprocessors) [20, 74]: instead of trying to make a single CPU core more powerful, manufac-
turers now implement multiple, simpler CPU cores within a single chip that can run multiple
tasks concurrently.1 The simpler core designs significantly reduced the areal power density (e.g.,
W/mm2) of the CPUs. Multicore CPUs perform concurrent processing by (1) performing con-
current multiprocessing of more than one program, and/or (2) extracting thread-level parallelism
(TLP) from a parallelizable application. While initial commercial multicore CPUs started out with
two identical CPU cores, today’s multicore CPUs have a wide range of configurations, with some
containing dozens of cores.
This chapter will examine six topics related to multicore CPU architectures. First, it will
motivate the benefits and limitations of processing multiple tasks concurrently, and how they
drove the need for parallel processing. Second, it will examine the hardware design of a typical
multicore CPU, and the changes required to support the efficient execution of multiple programs
on multiple CPU cores. Third, it will study how memory management policies change to handle
the increased traffic from multiple cores. Fourth, it will address software issues that optimize the
use of multicore CPUs. Fifth, it will introduce common metrics that are used in the context of
multicore CPUs. Finally, it will close by briefly discussing how commercial multicore CPUs have
evolved since their introduction.

1This chapter uses the term concurrent processing to refer strictly to multiple independent tasks executing at the
same time. It refers to the time multiplexing of a CPU core across multiple tasks as time-sharing.

2
Motivating the Need for Concurrent Processing

As early as the days of analog computing, the benefits of parallelizing tasks became a clear goal:
Luigi Federico Menabrea, in his 1842 study of Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine [60], noted
that a key advantage of mechanized computation would be its ability to produce several results
at the same time. In the mid 20th century, as digital computers evolved rapidly, there was a
pressing need to maximize both the performance and utilization of these computers, and the
extraction of parallelism, in its various forms, became a key approach to meet these needs. While
this chapter focuses on multicore CPUs, a brief taxonomy of parallel computing hardware is
provided in Section 2.1.
The early decades of electronic computing saw the introduction of several now-commonplace
parallelization techniques, such as instruction pipelining (1941, with the Zuse Z3 [73,91], followed
by significant advances in 1961 with the IBM 7030 Stretch [19] and ILLIAC II [83] supercomput-
ers), superscalar processing (1964, with the CDC 6600 supercomputer [85]), and general-purpose
time-sharing (1961, with the Compatible Time-Sharing System operating system [9]).2 This set
the stage for the rise of the two key types of parallelism exposed by multicore CPUs: multi-
processing (Section 2.2) and thread-level parallelism (Section 2.3). While both of these types of
parallelism can be exploited by a range of hardware organizations, historical trends in chip man-
ufacturing process technologies drove the emergence of the multicore CPU (Section 2.4).

2.1
Classifying Parallel Computing Hardware

Given the rise of multiple parallel computing techniques throughout the 1960s, there was a need
to categorize the techniques based on broadly-shared principles. To this end, Michael Flynn
developed what is now known as Flynn’s taxonomy in 1966 [24]. The original taxonomy classified
computer architectures into four categories, along two dimensions as shown in Figure 2:

• Single instruction stream, single data stream (SISD)

• Single instruction stream, multiple data stream (SIMD)

• Multiple instruction stream, single data stream (MISD)

• Multiple instruction stream, multiple data stream (MIMD)

Under Flynn’s taxonomy, non-pipelined, non-superscalar single-core CPUs that employ a von
Neumann architecture are a canonical example of a SISD architecture. Examples of SIMD archi-
tectures include graphics processing units (GPUs), array processors, and vector extensions for
CPUs. One reasonably-accepted example of a MISD architecture is redundant computing, such
as the systems employed in avionics units.3 The MIMD category includes most computers that
are capable of multiprocessing (Section 2.2), including computers with multicore CPUs.

2In this section, significant efforts were made to identify milestone systems that introduced or made critical
leaps forward in now-fundamental parallelism techniques. However, given the rapid pace of concurrent computer
development in the 1950s and 1960s, combined with limited available historical resources, these examples may not
always be the true originators of the techniques. When possible, dates associated with systems denote the year of
first delivery, as a proxy for the completion of the first working system.
3There is some latent controversy about which category pipelined CPUs fall into. In its best imitation of Switzer-
land and its neutrality, this chapter does not take a stand for any category. Sorry for being so bland.

Instruction

MISD

SISD

Data

MIMD

SIMD

Figure 2: An illustration of Flynn’s taxonomy.

In a multicore CPU, each CPU core is capable of executing one or more independent streams
of instructions, with each instruction stream operating on its own data set (though this data set
can potentially overlap with the data sets being used by other cores). To support this MIMD
model of execution, each core has its own control logic, and much of the computation takes place
independent from other cores. Section 3 elaborates on this more, while also discussing when
coordination between cores does occur (both explicitly and implicitly).

2.2
Multiprocessing

Before the days of personal computers (PCs), mainframes were the dominant form factor of com-
puters. Mainframe computers had a relatively high cost,4 and given the high demand to use these
computers, batching and time-sharing (i.e., time multiplexing) systems became commonplace.
Systems capable of batching would queue up multiple jobs to execute on a computer back-to-
back, while time-sharing systems extended this capability to execute multiple programs on the
same computer through temporal multiplexing.
More concretely, time-sharing involves the use of scheduling quanta, which are (typically pre-
determined) periods of time that a program can execute for before being preempted (i.e., switched
out). A time-sharing system runs one program for a single scheduling quantum, after which it
switches out the program from the CPU and looks at a queue of pending programs (which include
the one just switched out, assuming it did not complete within the quantum). The system then
selects the next program to run, switches it into the CPU, and lets it execute for a single schedul-
ing quantum, before repeating the switch-out/switch-in procedure. Time-sharing allowed mul-
tiple users to interact with a single computer at the same time, allowing each user’s program to
make forward progress even though the computer had only a single CPU. Thanks to the typically
short scheduling quanta (on the order of milliseconds in modern machines), time-sharing often
gives each user the illusion that the computer is continuously executing their application, as the
scheduling quantum is significantly faster than human perception of response time.
While time-sharing represents a key technological shift in the accessibility of computers, the
technique suffers from two critical overheads that significantly extend the overall execution time
of a program. First, in an ideal machine, each program now takes longer to complete as it re-
peatedly waits on other programs to execute. For example, if a computer runs 10 programs, each
taking the same amount of time to finish, and the operating system uses round-robin scheduling
to switch between each program, the programs will take 10× longer to complete than if they ran
uninterrupted. Second, in real-world machines, the execution time of each program is further

4The IBM System/360 Model 25, a low-end variant of IBM’s highly-popular mainframes, was announced in Jan-
uary 1968 with a purchase price of US $253,000 (US $2.33 million in 2024 dollars), with a monthly rental option at
$5,330 (US $49,000 in 2024 dollars) [88].

increased by the overhead of context switching. When a program is switched out, its registers
(and for some machines, dirty cache values) must be saved somewhere, and these values must be
restored when the program is switched back in.
As a natural progression towards concurrent execution without these overheads, researchers
began to explore whether a computer could incorporate multiple CPUs, where the CPUs have
the ability to communicate with each other.5 This technique, known as multiprocessing, was first
implemented in the Burroughs B 5000 [55] and D825 [2] mainframe computers, released in 1961
and 1962, respectively. In a computer capable of multiprocessing, multiple programs can execute
simultaneously, without the need to time-share the CPU. An operating system (OS) typically sees
a multi-CPU computer as a single system, and a multiprocessing-capable OS is responsible for
assigning programs to specific CPUs. Given the high cost of CPUs, many multi-CPU machines
still perform time-sharing on each CPU in addition to multiprocessing, and the OS uses various
scheduling heuristics to determine how best to choose which CPU a program should be scheduled
on.

2.3
Thread-Level Parallelism (TLP) Within an Application

While multiprocessing enabled increases in the throughput and/or productivity of a machine by
allowing many applications to execute concurrently, there still remained a need to reduce the ex-
ecution time of a single application. Hardware techniques such as instruction pipelining and su-
perscalar execution, along with compiler assisted techniques such as very long instruction words
(VLIW), unlocked instruction-level parallelism (ILP) within an application, by identifying indepen-
dent instructions that can execute concurrently. While ILP techniques have provided significant
performance boosts within a single process, there was also a need to exploit multiprocessing-
capable machines to run a parallel program, where multiple constituent tasks from the program
execute concurrently.
In order for a parallel program to be decomposed into multiple parallelizable tasks, there
needs to be (1) some way for these tasks to execute concurrently for much of their lifetime, as
well as (2) some way for the tasks to communicate and synchronize with each other in order to
generate a single set of results. Parallel programs require support at both a software and hardware
level to execute. In software, the core concepts on how to decompose a program into multiple
parallel tasks were developed in the 1950s and 1960s, and Dekker’s algorithm from 1960 [12,
15, 16] allowed programmers to enable mutually exclusive access to shared memory locations
among two concurrent processes. In hardware, the development of early multi-CPU machines
was accompanied with the introduction of shared memory. For example, the Burroughs B 5000
from 1962 [55] provided primitive shared memory support by letting all of its CPUs have shared
access to its memory modules. As the concept of parallel programming evolved, these tasks
eventually became formalized as threads that can execute asynchronously [89], and the use of
multiple concurrent threads to accelerate the execution of a program became known as thread-
level parallelism (TLP).
The performance improvement that a parallel program can achieve over its sequential coun-
terpart depends primarily on two factors: (1) the number of threads that can be executed con-

5Alternative techniques such as multithreading were also being developed around this time, with 1960’s Bull
Gamma 60 [17] and Honeywell 800 [61] being two early examples of hardware multithreading support. A constrained
version of multithreading was implemented in the DYSEAC in 1954 [51].

currently, and (2) the amount of synchronization needed. Amdahl’s Law models the impact of
the thread count on maximum performance improvements for a fixed problem size [1]. The law
states that the theoretical speedup S (i.e., the reduction in execution time) of a parallel program
over its sequential counterpart can be expressed as:

S =
1

(1)

(1 – f ) + f

n

where f is the fraction of the program that can be parallelized, and n is the number of concurrent
threads that can execute the parallelizable part of the program. To visualize Amdahl’s Law, Fig-
ure 3 shows an example where f = 0.4 (i.e., 40% of the program can be parallelized), for various
thread counts. As the figure shows, for every doubling of the thread count, the reduction in total
time is only half of the reduction achieved by the previous doubling.

Total Time: t

Sequential

0.6t
Parallelizable

0.4t
f = 0.4, n = 1

Total Time: 0.8t

Sequential

0.6t
Parallel

0.2t
f = 0.4, n = 2

f–2

Parallel

0.2t

Total Time: 0.7t

Sequential

0.6t
Par

0.1t
f = 0.4, n = 4

Par

f–4

0.1t
Par

0.1t
Par

0.1t

Total Time: 0.6t

f–∞= 0

Sequential

0.6t
f = 0.4, n = ∞

Figure 3: Amdahl’s Law visualized for an example application.

Figure 4a shows the theoretical parallel speedup achievable according to the law, for different
values of f . A key takeaway from Amdahl’s Law is that even for an infinite number of concurrent
threads (i.e., n = ∞), the maximum speedup S of a parallel program is bound by the time it takes
to execute the part of the program that is not parallelizable. While Amdahl’s Law encompasses
key properties of parallel execution, it has two important limitations.
First, Amdahl’s Law does not explicitly account for the additional overhead of synchroniza-
tion primitives. As more threads execute concurrently, the contention for acquiring mutually
exclusive access to a portion of shared memory can increase. For example, if all of the threads
of a parallel program share and update a single counter, they must use a mutual exclusion prim-
itive (i.e., mutex) to ensure that updates from one thread are not inadvertently lost by another

f=0.5
f=0.9
f=0.99
f=1

f=1

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256

2.0

226
236
246
256

1.5

f=0.99

Speedup

Speedup

1.0

f=0.1

4
32
256

252
254
256

f=0.9

f=0.01

f=0.01
f=0.1
f=0.5

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128 256

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128 256

Number of Threads

Number of Threads

(a) Amdahl’s Law.

(b) Gustafson’s Law.

Figure 4:
Comparison of theoretical parallel speedup estimated by Amdahl’s Law and
Gustafson’s Law, for different parallelizable fractions f . Inset graphs show a zoomed-in section
of the main graph for clarity.

thread. This requires each thread to acquire the mutex whenever it updates the counter, and
other threads that attempt to acquire a mutex that is currently held by another thread will stall.
As more threads execute concurrently, the likelihood increases that more threads will contend
at the same time to acquire the mutex, introducing more stalls. In practice, these synchroniza-
tion overheads from mutex contention (as well as interference between threads due to resource
sharing; see Section 3.2) can make it such that adding a parallel thread can actually decrease the
parallel speedup, as shown in Figure 5 below.
Second, Amdahl’s Law assumes that the problem size is fixed regardless of the number of
parallel threads. In reality, the number of threads used to parallelize a program is typically linked
with the number of available CPUs. For a multiprocessing machine, when there are more CPUs,
a program has more resources available to it, such as memory capacity. As a result, programmers
and/or users can increase the problem size to take advantage of these extra resources. Since
Amdahl’s Law does not capture the impact of these extra resources, it can provide a pessimistic
estimate of the capabilities of a multi-CPU machine. Gustafson’s Law [32] accounts for this, by
calculating the parallel speedup S as:

S = (1 – f ) + f × n
(2)

Figure 4b shows the predicted speedups from the law, to provide a comparison to Amdahl’s Law.
Real-world parallel system performance deviates from both Amdahl’s Law and Gustafson’s
Law. For example, while one could treat Gustafson’s Law as an optimistic upper bound on perfor-
mance, real machines can sometimes outperform the estimated parallel speedup from Gustafson’s
Law due to data sharing. If one thread brings data into a shared memory that is subsequent used
by a second thread (exploiting temporal and/or spatial locality across threads), the second thread
no longer pays the memory latency required for that subsequent data access (assuming that the
data is not evicted). This phenomenon is an example of super-linear speedup.
Putting this all together, Figure 5 shows a synthetically-constructed example of the parallel
speedup one could expect to observe on a real parallel system. The example assumes that 99%
of the application can be parallelized across all threads, while the remaining 1% must execute
sequentially. It also assumes that the machine has 32 CPU cores, and since it has a fixed set

of available resources, Amdahl’s Law can be used to predict performance. There are three ob-
servations from the figure. First, even with a single thread, the observed speedup is less than
1. This is because parallel speedup is compared against the best sequential implementation (see
Section 6), and a parallel implementation (with a configurable parameter n that sets the thread
count) typically has overheads associated with adding code to support parallel execution, and
these overheads are observed when n = 1. Second, super-linear speedups can even exceed per-
fect parallelism. As mentioned above, this is the result of threads helping each other through
data locality. Third, after a certain thread count (24 in our example), the performance at a higher
thread count is actually lower than the performance at a lower thread count. This is because
the benefits of additional thread-level parallelism and additional data locality are overcome by
synchronization and interference overheads.

0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

Super-Linear
Speedup

Speedup

0
1
2

Slowdown

0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32

Number of Threads

Figure 5: A synthetic example of observable behavior in a real-world parallel system. The dotted
line shows ideal parallelism (f = 1 with Amdahl’s Law), the dashed line shows expected perfor-
mance (f = 0.99 with Amdahl’s Law), and the solid line shows observed performance.

Note that while Figure 5 is one example of parallel application behavior, its trends are not
universal. As one example, some applications exhibit what is known as embarrassingly parallel
behavior [59], where an application continues to achieve near-ideal parallel speedup even at high
thread counts, due to limited need for synchronization and serialization.

2.4
What to Do With All These Transistors?

Through the 1990s (and drawing some very broad, and likely inaccurate, generalizations), the
vast majority of parallel computing architectures catered to the large-scale computing market,
with much of the effort focused on supercomputers. Most personal computers (PCs) and work-
stations6 incorporated only a single-core CPU (or in the case of some high-end workstations,
multiple single-core CPUs installed on a multi-socket motherboard). Much of the focus on ar-
chitectural innovation remained on improving the performance of the single core, leading to the
maturation and widespread commercial adoption of techniques such as out-of-order processing
and superscalar execution.

6At that time, there was a distinction between more mainstream PCs and high-performance workstations that tar-
geted power users. Today, in large part due to advancements in PC capabilities throughout the 1990s, this distinction
has mostly disappeared, but the chapter references it here for historical context.

Concurrently, several architects started envisioning a new direction of CPU design. In the
early 1990s, with no immediate end in sight to Moore’s Law and Dennard Scaling, a number of
works speculated that with millions of additional transistors becoming available on a chip within
the next decade, it would now be feasible to replicate multiple CPU cores within a single chip. This
concept came to be known as a single-chip multiprocessor (which ultimately led to the term chip
multiprocessor, or CMP). A number of varying designs were proposed, ranging from asymmetric
and/or specialized cores [44, 76] to clustered CPUs [23, 80], as well as an early symmetric core
design with a shared cache [33]. The Hydra CMP project at Stanford started to explore the trade-
offs of using shared caches across multiple smaller CPU cores for coordination, in comparison to
a high-performance single-core CPU, which led to their seminal 1996 paper [68] that advocated
for many of the key features of a modern multicore CPU. Around that same time, architects at
IBM started designing what would become the first commercially-available multicore CPU for
non-embedded computers, the POWER4 [84].7 The POWER4 combined two CPU cores onto a
single die,8 with a core frequency of 1.1 GHz and a thermal design point (TDP) of 115 W.
The wider adoption of multicore CPUs was hastened by two trends observed in the late 1990s.
First, a handful of computer engineers started raising the alarm on an impending crisis with power
consumption. While Moore’s Law (focused on increasing transistor count) remained alive and
well (in what was truly a simpler time for the architecturally inclined), they predicted that Den-
nard scaling would begin to break down in the near future, which when combined with aggressive
architectural changes would significantly increase both the power consumption of a chip and the
chip’s areal power density [11, 25]. As one example, in the span of a decade, Intel saw the the
TDP9 of its high-end CPUs increase by an order of magnitude, from 3.5 W for the i486DX-25 [38]
(released in 1989) to 34.5 W for the Pentium III 600 [39] (released in 1999). Then-contemporary
projections expected the thermal density of a chip to double every four years, with the density
approaching that of a nuclear reactor by the mid-2000s [11,74]. While the industry still had in-
creasing transistor counts for a fixed area of silicon, it was becoming more difficult to use all
of these transistors to their full capacity without surpassing the capabilities of thermal dissipa-
tion techniques. Second, more aggressive techniques for extracting instruction-level parallelism
(ILP), such as deeper pipelining, larger superscalar widths, and deeper instruction lookahead for
out-of-order processing, were resulting in diminished returns [74]. These limits arose due to a
combination of (1) inherent limits to the amount of ILP available in modern applications (due to
dependencies and data-dependent control flow) and (2) the quickly increasing complexity of logic
required to extract further ILP. Combined, these issues made it increasingly difficult to continue

7The earliest known implementation of a commercial multicore single-chip CPU is the COP2440 series by National
Semiconductor [67] (along with the COP2404 variant for prototyping), which was released in 1982. The COP2440
combined two embedded CPU cores on a single die to enable concurrent processing of real-time operations, with a
shared memory subsystem.
8Unfortunately, the term chip has overloaded definitions, so this chapter will use the following. A die is a piece
of semiconductor material (typically silicon), and a chip is an integrated circuit that consists of one or more dies. A
chip is typically placed inside a package, which allows the chip to be placed in a socket to interact with other chips
and electrical components.
9Conventionally, the thermal design point of a CPU represented its maximum power consumption, and served
as a direct proxy for the maximum amount of heat that the CPU would dissipate. In today’s usage, however, TDP
may not account for additional power consumed when turbo modes are engaged, and TDP instead represents the
longer-term maximum power under non-turbo steady state.

aggressive single-core performance scaling, and multicore CPUs presented an attractive alterna-
tive to improving system performance.
As the breakdown of Dennard scaling materialized during the first few years of the 2000s, the
power consumption issue was exacerbated significantly. This added pressure led the next wave
of multicore CPUs to make a key trade-off to avoid the impending limits of thermal density: they
operated each CPU core at a lower frequency than their single-core contemporaries, in the hopes
that the increased parallel processing capability would make up for reduced single-core perfor-
mance [20]. Section 3.1 discusses more about the CPU core trade-offs, which allowed architects
to harness TLP instead of aggressive ILP to improve performance while keeping power issues
under control, and opened the floodgates for the proliferation of multicore CPUs.

3
Multicore CPU Hardware Design

While the term multicore CPU may lead one to think that there are significant additions at a
microarchitectural level to enable parallel execution, the central design of the cores are often (but
not always) simpler than the most aggressive single-core CPU microarchitectures released by
manufacturers. In fact, the majority of the critical hardware changes to enable multicore CPUs
lie outside of the CPU core. A central tenet of multicore CPU design is that performance can be
attained through parallelism and repetition, as opposed to design complexity.
Figure 6 shows a typical example of the major components found in a multicore CPU. Two
or more CPU cores sit within the same chip package, with each core having its own (i.e., private)
L1 instruction, L1 data, and unified L2 caches. All of the cores have shared access to a single
last-level cache (LLC). The LLC connects with one or more on-chip memory controllers, which
provide access to off-chip DRAM modules in the system.

3.1
Optimizing CPU Cores for Parallelism

Multicore CPU designers prevent the design and verification of the CPU from increasing linearly
with the core count by relying on design reuse through tiling. In a homogeneous multicore CPU,
the design of the cores is identical, in order to reduce manufacturing and verification/testing
costs. (Section 7 discusses popular approaches for heterogeneous multicore CPU design.) Figure 6
shows how the majority of the chip for a typical homogeneous multicore CPU is made up of
multiple tiles, where each tile has exactly the same components. A tile usually consists of a single
CPU core and the private caches associated with that core. Some architectures include a slice of
the last-level cache in the tile (see Section 3.2). In addition to these tiles, the chip includes shared
components (e.g., controllers that connect the CPU cores to external components, interconnects).
To enable multiple tiles to be stamped out without incurring an exorbitant increase in chip
area compared to a powerful single-core CPU, the CPU core within the tile is significantly simpli-
fied. As an example, the Core 2 Duo, the second line of desktop multicore CPUs by Intel (and the
first whose microarchitecture was designed with dual-core processing in mind), was not based
off of the then-state-of-the-art NetBurst microarchitecture [7] that formed the basis of the Pen-
tium 4. Instead, it utilized a new microarchitecture known as Core, which was based on the
mobile-oriented Pentium M variant of the P6 microarchitecture [35], with roots spanning back
to the mid-1990s.

CPU Core 0

CPU Core 1

to off-chip DRAM
tile

per-core, private
to off-chip DRAM

L1I SRAM L1D SRAM

L1I SRAM L1D SRAM

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

SRAM

SRAM

Controller

Controller

Memory

Memory

Shared Last-Level Cache
(L3 Cache)

SRAM

L2 Cache

SRAM
L2 Cache

SRAM

L1I SRAM L1D SRAM L1I SRAM L1D SRAM

CPU Core 2
CPU Core 3

Figure 6: An example four-core multicore CPU.

Examples of CPU Simplification.
While it is difficult to directly compare CPUs across differ-
ent microarchitectures, there are three key features that highlight some of the decisions made to
simplify the Core 2 Duo’s CPU cores compared to the NetBurst microarchitecture, as a motivat-
ing example. First, the Core microarchitecture initially consisted of 14 pipeline stages, compared
to the 31 pipeline stages found in the last generations of the NetBurst microarchitecture. Second,
CPU clock frequencies were significantly lowered as well, with the first generation of Core 2
Duo desktop CPUs achieving a peak frequency of 2.67 GHz [41], compared to a peak frequency
of 3.8 GHz for the Pentium 4 desktop CPUs [40]. Third is the removal of multithreading sup-
port, which allows a CPU to simultaneously execute two applications on the same CPU core
through strategic resource sharing. Multithreading was not included in the initial Core 2 Duo
CPUs, despite being a prominent feature of the Pentium 4 architecture. It is important, how-
ever, to note that these were not long-term changes: deeper pipelines, high clock frequencies,
and multithreading support all returned in future Intel multicore CPUs, as continued manufac-
turing process scaling and microarchitectural innovations enabled these and other features to be
implemented more efficiently.

Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling.
Given the significant implications of the power
wall, several low-power techniques were developed around the same time as the emergence of
multicore CPUs. One such technique that has become commonplace is dynamic voltage and fre-
quency scaling (DVFS) [57]. With the dramatic performance increase of CPUs through the 1990s,
a single CPU was capable of performing significant amounts of computation in a short amount
of time. However, this peak throughput is achievable only if there is enough computation to per-
form. In reality, programs frequently encounter stalls, where the CPU is unable to maximize its
throughput and can eventually sit idle as it waits for more instructions to be ready to execute.
Stalls can occur for a number of reasons, such as having limited opportunities for ILP in a highly-
pipelined superscalar CPU, or having frequent memory or I/O operations that can take hundreds
to thousands of cycles to service.
When the CPU is unable to achieve peak throughput, significant energy is wasted by running
the CPU at its full voltage and frequency. The dynamic power Pdyn consumed by a CPU to execute
a program can be modeled as a function of its supply voltage (V) and frequency (f ):

Pdyn ∝α × C × V 2 × f
(3)

where α is an activity factor, and C is the switched load capacitance of the CPU’s transistors.
Over time, if the CPU continues at full dynamic power during periods of underutilization, a large
amount of energy is wasted. DVFS techniques can detect when the CPU is stalling or being
underutilized, and reduce the supply voltage and/or the clock frequency of the CPU.
One limitation of DVFS is Vmin, the minimum operating voltage of the CPU core. A lower
bound on Vmin is the threshold voltage of a transistor, which is the minimum voltage at which
the transistor effectively operates as a digital switch. The threshold voltage is a function of the
manufacturing process technology. Practically, though, Vmin is notably higher than the threshold
voltage, in order to ensure the reliable operation of the CPU. Between the nominal operating
voltage (Vdd) and Vmin, DVFS lowers the voltage of the selected CPU core. As the voltage is
linearly correlated with the CPU core frequency, this results in a cubic reduction in dynamic
power, based on Equation 3. Once DVFS reaches Vmin, it can continue to lower the frequency,
but must leave the voltage at Vmin, resulting in a linear reduction in dynamic power. Figure 7
shows this relationship for a hypothetical CPU, with a base frequency of 4.0 GHz at a thermal
design point (TDP) of 88 W, Vdd = 1.2 V, Vmin = 1.0 V, and a turbo boost frequency of 4.4 GHz.
Given that each core in a multicore system has the ability to execute a different thread or
workload from the other cores, it is inefficient to manage DVFS settings at a global level. How-
ever, early approaches to DVFS relied on large off-chip switching voltage regulators, which each
consumed significant area and power, and which had response times on the order of tens of mi-
croseconds. Within a few years of the introduction of DVFS in commercial systems, on-chip
voltage regulators were developed. These on-chip regulators, often called buck converters [47],
are capable of performing sub-100 ns voltage switching, at >90% efficiency. Due to their low cost
and fast response, buck-converter-based DVFS is now widely used in multicore CPUs, where each
CPU core has its own on-chip regulator to allow for per-core DVFS throttling. The voltage and
frequency settings for each core are typically selected in the operating system, using a governor
(see Section 5).

120

Dynamic Power (W)

Voltage
Reduction

100

80

60

No Voltage
Reduction

40

20

0

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5

CPU Frequency (GHz)

Figure 7: Dynamic power as a function of DVFS-selected frequency. Solid line shows the actual
DVFS behavior, while the dotted line shows idealized further reductions to dynamic power if
Vmin was not a lower limit to voltage scaling.

3.2
Sharing Caches and Main Memory

At a high level, general-purpose CPU design aims to accommodate a wide range of workloads
by providing enough hardware resources to execute most, if not all, of the expected CPU work-
loads with reasonable performance and efficiency. As a result, CPU design tends to provision
resources for close to worst-case behavior, while enabling optimizations for the common case.
Multicore CPUs provide an opportunity to mitigate some of the costs of worst-case resource al-
location in single-core CPUs. For example, in the single-core model, the cache hierarchy should
ideally provide enough cache capacity to handle common workloads that exhibit large cacheable
data footprints (e.g., workloads with memory access patterns that exploit spatial and/or temporal
locality across multiple megabytes of data).
In a multicore CPU, the ability to share (i.e., pool together) resources across multiple cores
can allow us to support near-worst-case behavior for a subset of cores (e.g., if one core runs a
worst-case workload), while keeping total resource allocation at a more modest level. Returning
to the cache capacity example, while a multicore CPU catering to the worst case (e.g., a situation
where each core runs a large-footprint workload) could potentially require several megabytes of
cache capacity per core, multicore designers instead reduce the per-core amount of cache in the
CPU, and instead allow cores to share much of their cache capacity with each other. The two
most prominent examples of resource sharing in a multicore CPU are in the memory hierarchy:
the last-level cache (LLC) and main memory.
One issue with sharing resources across CPU cores is interference [6], where due to the finite
amount of available resources, multiple cores may contend with each other for their desired share
of these resources. Let us look at a contrived example, with a two-core CPU, where one core is
servicing a cache miss that must retrieve data from main memory. As the data for that miss
arrives at the LLC, the LLC must evict an existing cache block (assuming that no invalid blocks
remain). Interference can occur when the eviction is for a cache block belonging to the other
core, as that core will now miss on a subsequent access to the evicted block. Had the first core
not triggered the eviction, this subsequent access would have been a cache hit, avoiding the long-
latency miss to main memory. The resource contention that results from multicore interference
can hurt the effective performance and energy consumption of the CPU (Section 6 discusses

metrics to quantify this impact). As a result, several approaches have been proposed to mitigate
interference in the memory hierarchy (see Section 4.3).

Multicore Cache Hierarchy.
A multicore CPU maintains a combination of private caches (i.e.,
caches accessible by only a single CPU core) and shared caches (i.e., caches accessible by multiple
CPU cores) that are made of static random-access memory (SRAM). For each core, a typical modern
multicore CPU includes a private L1 instruction cache, a private L1 data cache, and a private L2
unified cache (i.e., a cache that holds both instructions and data). The LLC (the L3 cache in typical
modern multicore CPUs) is shared naively (i.e., without any core-based partitioning) across all
cores in the CPU: any workload executing in the CPU can allocate a cache block anywhere in the
shared cache. This allows workloads with heterogeneous cache needs to co-exist symbiotically:
as an example, if one workload wants to use a large portion of the cache while another workload
needs only a small portion of the cache, both workloads can execute concurrently while satisfying
their needs.
In order to accommodate the needs of all of the cores in the multicore CPU, the LLC tries
to reduce the potential for set contention, and the associated invalidations. First, the LLC is
significantly larger (e.g., on the order of multiple megabytes, reaching tens of megabytes for large
contemporary multicore CPUs) than the typical LLC capacities from the single-core era (e.g., the
L2 caches of that era, then the LLC of the CPU, were only hundreds of kilobytes in size). Second,
the LLC has notably higher associativity, with modern CPUs implementing 24-way and 32-way
set-associative caches. While this significantly increases the area of the LLC, with some multicore
CPUs using as much as half of their total die area for the LLC, the increases are amortized across
all of the cores (as compared to increases in the private cache area).

Constructing Large Caches.
Modern LLCs typically make use of hierarchical designs to pro-
vide the large capacities required by contemporary workloads. A modern LLC can contain hun-
dreds of thousands of cache sets, and if a CPU designer were to maintain a monolithic array for
the entire LLC capacity, they would have to deal with very large wire delays, as a bitline would
potentially be shared by hundreds of thousands of rows, increasing the capacitance and resistance
of both the wire itself and the parasitic impacts of each attached row. The increased capacitance
and resistance translate into linear increases in delay and energy, and if left unaddressed can un-
dermine the utility and efficiency of the LLC. Compounding the issue is the need for more cache
ports, as multiple cores may want to access the cache at the same time, and a single-ported LLC
can lead to starvation during periods of heavy cache request queuing.
To work around capacity and port limitations, modern caches rely on the concept of cache slic-
ing, where a cache level is decomposed into multiple smaller pieces.10 Each cache slice contains
a subset of the total number of cache sets in the level, and is further partitioned by the number of
ways. The slicing requires each cache access to first go through a slice decoder to identify which
slice to look up. While early slice decoder implementations used a subset of the cache block ad-
dress bits (e.g., using two of the cache index bits to decide which of four slices the block is assigned

10Cache slicing has been referred to by several terms over the years, including cache interleaving and cache
multi-banking. Early works on cache interleaving date to 1980 [77], and initial implementations interleaved (i.e.,
distributed) the words within a single cache block across multiple cache banks. This chapter uses the term cache
slicing to refer to cache block interleaving across cache slices/banks, where a single slice/bank contains the entire
cache block [81].

to), several commercial CPUs employ complex hash-based set mapping functions (e.g., [52]) to
avoid hotspots (i.e., the uneven distribution of cache accesses across slices).
Inside a slice, to further manage scalability, the slice is typically partitioned into a tag store (i.e.,
a tag directory, which stores metadata about each cache block in the slice) and a data store (i.e.,
the actual data inside each cache block). While tag–data partitioning is an independent concept
from cache slicing, it also helps to reduce cache energy by not activating the data bitlines unless
a cache hit occurs (albeit at the expense of increased latency due to serializing the tag and data
lookups). Note that for very large caches, the data store of a cache slice can be further partitioned
into multiple two-dimensional subarrays of SRAM [36], to further reduce power consumption.
There are two general approaches to laying out the shared LLC on a multicore CPU chip,
both of which support cache slicing. As mentioned in Section 3.1, a multicore CPU is made up
of multiple tiles, where a tile includes a CPU core and its private caches. The first approach for
LLC layout allocates a fixed amount of cache outside of these tiles, as shown in Figure 8a, using a
separate tile for the LLC. Often with this layout, the controller for the LLC is centralized, and each
core has access to the cache controller via a bus (i.e., a shared wire across all cores), though some
implementations maintain an independent controller for each cache slice, in which case a crossbar
is used. The second approach for LLC layout includes a slice of the LLC with each CPU core tile,
as shown in Figure 8b (leading to a one-to-one correspondence between core count and cache
slice count). With this layout, each cache slice typically maintains an independent controller, and
the controllers are connected together using a ring interconnect [36,52].

Tile

Tile

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

Last-Level Cache
(LLC)

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

LLC Slice

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

CPU Core

(b) Tile containing an LLC slice.

(a) Tile without a piece of the LLC.

Figure 8: Two approaches to tiling a multicore CPU layout. Note that tiles on the bottom row
are intentionally shown upside down to represent the stamping of identical tiles.

A key challenge with large LLCs is access time. Conventionally, monolithic caches provide
uniform cache access, where all cores can access any block in the cache with the same latency

(assuming no interference). As LLCs have become larger and sliced, cores often deal with non-
uniform cache access (NUCA) [45], where it can take a longer time for a core to access a remote
slice (i.e., the additional time required to traverse the interconnect) than it does to access its local
slice. A NUCA cache can incur higher latencies than a cache with uniform cache accesses, but
the slicing enables additional bandwidth by allowing concurrent accesses to each slice, mitigating
some of the performance loss.

Main Memory.
Main memory modules (which consist of dynamic random-access memory, or
DRAM, chips in modern systems) are connected to a CPU by a memory channel (see Section 4
for details). Any core in a multicore CPU can access any of the CPU’s memory channels, by
accessing the on-chip memory controller that corresponds to the desired memory channel. As
is the case for single-core CPUs, the memory controllers in a multicore CPU receive requests
from the LLC. Given the sliced architecture of the LLC, each slice typically has the independent
ability to dispatch cache misses to a memory controller. This is achieved by providing each slice
with dedicated miss status holding registers (MSHRs) [48], which make use of fully-associative
structures built using content-addressable memories (CAMs) to track in-flight cache requests. As
there is not usually a one-to-one correspondence between cache slices and memory controllers
(the typical multicore CPU has more cache slices than memory controllers), a slice can dispatch
misses to any controller, and chooses the correct controller based on how the system partitions
memory addresses across memory channels.
For a given mix of workloads, a multicore CPU with n cores can potentially issue cache misses
to main memory at as much as n times the rate that a single-core CPU does (note that this assumes
similar core architectures in both CPUs, and depends heavily on the specific workloads and on
the impact of cache interference between cores). This requires the main memory to scale up its
ability to respond to these cache misses, and modern memory subsystems have two examples
of this. First, more MSHRs are provided at the LLC in order to sustain a greater number of
concurrent memory accesses. An LLC miss must stall any time the cache does not have a free
MSHR available to allocate. If there are not enough MSHRs in the system, then such stalls are
more likely to occur. As each cache slice often has its own set of MSHRs, multicore CPUs take
advantage of the increased slice count to provide more MSHRs at a low cost, compared to scaling
up a monolithic CAM. Second, the memory bandwidth has been scaling up to accommodate the
increased demand. The memory bandwidth provided by DRAM has been increasing significantly
over the last two decades, through a combination of (1) increasing bus frequencies for the memory
channel and (2) the emergence of new DRAM types such as DDR5 [43] and High-Bandwidth
Memory (HBM) [42]. While memory bandwidth can also be scaled by increasing the number of
memory channels per CPU, multicore CPUs have largely avoided this approach due to the limited
number of pins available in the CPU chip package.
The sharing of a single main memory across multiple cores can introduce new changes to the
behavior of three properties, compared to their behavior with single-core CPUs. First, the optimal
choice of an address interleaving scheme (i.e., which bits index which memory structures) can
change depending on the type of workload executing on the CPU. Second, the optimal choice of
row policy (i.e., whether a DRAM row is left open after all currently-queued requests are serviced)
can depend on the type of workload as well. Third, the memory scheduling algorithm (i.e., the order

in which queued DRAM requests are serviced) may need to change to avoid starving requests in
certain scenarios. Section 4.2 discusses each of these in detail.

3.3
Coordinating Memory Requests Across Cores

One key artifact of the memory hierarchy of a multicore CPU is that cores do not always write
updates to globally-visible locations. For example, in a typical multi-level hierarchy that employs
write-back caches, a core will write data to its private L1 data cache, but this updated value will
not be immediately visible to other cores in the CPU, as they cannot directly access another core’s
private cache. This is at odds with the architectural model (i.e., abstraction) that is presented to
programmers, where the cores have access to a global shared memory (which is not the same as
main memory; see Section 4.1 for more details). As part of this shared-memory model, a data
update written by a core to shared memory will become visible to other cores. In contrast, caches
are a microarchitectural optimization that is not, in principle, exposed to programmers as part of
the architectural abstraction.11 As such, any interaction that a core has with a cache must appear
to the program as if it’s taking place globally in shared memory, as this is what a programmer
expects.
In order to maintain program correctness, multicore CPU must ensure that data updates are
coordinated across all of the cores (as is the case in any parallel computer architecture). For the
shared-memory programming model typically used for multicore CPUs, this involves two types of
coordination [66]: (1) cache coherence, which ensures that updates to a single unit of data (e.g., one
cache block) are made visible to and ordered across all cores; and (2) memory consistency, which
ensures that updates across multiple units of data are interleaved according to a predetermined
policy across all cores. Sections 4.4 and 4.5 discuss cache coherence and memory consistency,
respectively, in more detail.

3.4
Scaling to Many Cores

While the term multicore does not in theory place any limits on the number of cores in a CPU,
there is a distinction made between multicore CPUs with smaller core counts (e.g., under 24 cores
in contemporary systems) and manycore CPUs, which are multicore CPUs that consist of sev-
eral dozens of cores. This distinction is made because of key scalability challenges that become
prominent as the core count increases significantly. For the smaller core counts, the interconnects
described in Section 3.2 can enable reasonable parallel performance. However, at the manycore
level, the significant increase in contention makes both bus-based and ring-based interconnects
infeasible. As a result, specialized research and development has focused on how to provide more
scalable communication at high core counts.
The initial ideas that would evolve into manycore CPU design stem from the Raw micropro-
cessor project at MIT [87]. Conceived around the same time as the Hydra CMP (Section 2.4),

11This is in part because (1) caches are designed to be hardware-managed structures that operate transparently
to the programmer, and (2) cache configurations can differ between different CPU models belonging to the same
instruction set architecture. In practice, programmers use knowledge of the design of the cache hierarchy to optimize
program performance, while still expecting the behavior of the system to adhere to the semantics of the shared-
memory programming model.

the Raw CPU took a more extreme approach to CPU core simplification, arguing that sophisti-
cated compilers could offload the need for complex ILP mechanisms. As a result, the Raw CPU
consisted of multiple small tiles, where each tile included a very simple CPU core along with a
small piece of cache. The tiles were meant to be composable: depending on the needs of a plat-
form, and on the available transistor count, a manufacturer could stamp out more or fewer tiles
depending on their needs. By making each tile small, the distance between tiles (and, thus, the
distance between cores) and intra-tile wire lengths would both be short, allowing for the CPU
to run at a faster clock frequency without excessive power consumption. To enable composabil-
ity with varying tile counts, the tiles connected to each other using a packetized mesh network
(a two-dimensional interconnect), including configurable on-chip routers. The first Raw CPU,
prototyped in 2002, included 16 tiles on a single chip.
Unfortunately, there is no precise definition of a core count or of specific properties that a
manycore CPU must have, and the perceived distinction between manycore CPUs and more con-
ventional multicore CPUs has shifted as capabilities have evolved over the last two decades. Aside
from mesh-based tile organizations, other properties observed in several manycore CPUs include
non-uniform cache access (NUCA) architectures with multiple cache slices, and the replacement
of hardware cache coherence with software-driven message passing interfaces. While not a com-
prehensive list, examples of commercial CPUs that have been considered to be manycore include
the Tilera TILE 64 (a commercialization of the MIT Raw CPU), the Intel Xeon Phi series, and
various CPUs from PEZY, including their 2048-core PEZY-SC2 released in 2017.

4
Managing Memory

The cores in a multicore CPU share memory with each other, as discussed in Section 3.2. This
sharing introduces a number of issues that must be considered by both programmers and ar-
chitects. This section will discuss several of these issues. To start, it defines what it means to
share memory, both from a software perspective and a hardware perspective. Then, it discusses
main memory management, and how management policies in hardware can impact the perfor-
mance of threads running on a multicore CPU. Finally, it discusses examples of cache coherence
and memory consistency protocols that ensure correct program behavior in a shared-memory
environment.
To guide the discussion in this section, Figure 9 shows an example of how the hardware in a
memory subsystem is shared across the cores in a multicore CPU. All of the cores in a multicore
CPU share a last-level cache (LLC; see Section 3.2 for LLC design details). If a cache request misses
in the LLC, it must go to main memory, which is made up of DRAM. The physical address space
of a system enables each byte physically available within the main memory to be accessed using
a unique address. The physical memory is split up across one or more memory channels, where
each channel connects to one or more DRAM modules. Each channel is managed independently
of one another, and access management and maintenance tasks (e.g., refresh) are handled by a
dedicated memory controller for the channel (see Section 4.2). Each module contains a series of
DRAM chips, which are grouped into one or more ranks. All the chips belonging to a rank operate
in lockstep (i.e., they always perform the same operations on the same row/column of the same
arrays in each chip). A rank consists of several banks of memory, with each bank physically
striped across all of the chips in a rank. Logically, a bank operates as a single two-dimensional

array of DRAM cells, where a cell consists of a capacitor and a transistor, and can hold one bit
of data. Due to the small charge capacity of the capacitor, the memory controller cannot directly
perform data operations on the DRAM cell, and instead loads (i.e., activates) one row from a bank
at a time into the row buffer, from which the controller can issue reads from and writes to the
activated row.

Chip

Bank

DRAM Cell

. . .

CPU Core

CPU Core

L1I
L1D

L1I
L1D

Row Buffer

L2 Cache

L2 Cache

DRAM Module

Last-Level Cache
(LLC)

Rank

. . .
Bank
Bank
. .
. .

Memory
Controller

Memory
Controller

Memory Channel

Figure 9: Example memory hierarchy for a multicore CPU, showing shared on-chip last-level
cache and shared off-chip main memory.

4.1
Shared-Memory Model

From the first symmetric multiprocessor computer, the Burroughs D825 [2], the majority of mul-
tiprocessor systems have enabled CPU cores to share the physical main memory with each other.
Through the decades, to mitigate the long latencies of memory, several microarchitectural en-
hancements (e.g., caches, memory speculation) have extended the memory subsystem hardware,
but have done so transparently to the programmer. From the programmer’s perspective, multi-
core CPUs predominantly make use of a shared-memory model, which at a high level resembles
primitive computers. In the shared-memory model, each core has access to a single shared physi-
cal memory (which may be implemented in a centralized or distributed manner). When any core
performs a store to an address in this single shared memory, the update becomes visible to all
cores that subsequently load from that address. While in principle the shared-memory model
sounds simple, it has two key implications on the design of multiprocessor systems (and, by ex-
tension, multicore CPUs).
First, for a core, one needs to define when a store is considered to be performed (i.e., the
moment at which the stored value becomes visible to other cores). For example, for an out-of-
order core, a popular definition is that a store is performed once the store instruction is committed.
Prior to commit, there are several events that can cause an executed store to be squashed (e.g.,
exception, misspeculation), making the commit event the earliest time that the store is guaranteed
to safely proceed. As a result, stores are buffered inside the core, and the store operation to
the first-level cache is not initiated until after the store instruction commits. A physical store

buffer (sometimes called a write buffer) contains all committed writes that are yet to be issued to
the cache. Depending on the memory consistency model, this store buffer may or may not be
considered a part of shared memory; if it is, the store values in the buffer must be made available
to other cores in a way that does not violate the consistency model (see Section 4.5 for more).
Second, the CPU must ensure that microarchitectural optimizations for memory operations
obey a consistent set of rules, which are part of the instruction set architecture (ISA), so that
programmers do not encounter program correctness issues during execution. All private and
shared caches are considered part of the shared memory, which means that cache coherence is
needed to propagate the value of a cache store to other caches and cores, as Section 4.4 discusses.
Both within a thread and across threads, the interleaving of a store with other stores and with
loads must obey a set of rules that are promised to the programmer, which are defined as part of
the memory consistency model. As Section 4.5 discusses, some memory consistency models have
strict interleaving expectations, which can simplify programming complexity at the expense of
high performance overheads, while more relaxed memory consistency models can allow different
cores to observe different interleavings (following a defined set of guarantees) in order to improve
performance.

4.2
Main Memory Policies

As discussed in Section 3.2, there are three types of policies for main memory management that
are impacted by the introduction of multiple cores: address interleaving, row policy, and memory
scheduling. Each of these policies is implemented inside the memory controller. Unlike the single-
core case, where the choice of policy for each type can be determined by analyzing program
behavior, the non-determinism that exists for shared-memory interactions in a multicore CPU
make it difficult to easily choose a single optimal policy.

Address Interleaving.
Address interleaving (also known as memory interleaving) schemes [5]
determine the way in which address bits are assigned to index different levels of the main mem-
ory organization, in an attempt to take advantage of spatial locality and memory-level parallelism
(MLP) [28]. As shown in Figure 9, a typical DRAM-based main memory includes one or more
memory channels, where each channel contains one or more DRAM modules. Within each mod-
ule, there are multiple chips, with the chips grouped into one or more ranks. Each rank (a group
of DRAM chips that operate in lockstep) contains multiple banks of DRAM, where each bank
can mostly operate in parallel with each other. Inside each bank, at most one row of DRAM can
be open at a time, where a row holds multiple columns of data (with each row in commonplace
DRAM types containing a few kilobytes of data).
Figure 10 illustrates two common interleaving schemes that optimize locality and MLP over
a basic approach without interleaving. In the first scheme, cache block interleaving, consecutive
cache blocks in the memory address space are distributed to different banks (and in some cases
to different memory channels) to allow requests to the two blocks to be serviced concurrently. In
the second scheme, row interleaving, consecutive cache blocks stay in the same row to maximize
hits to the already-open row, but consecutive rows are distributed to different banks/channels.
While cache block interleaving is a popular scheme for single-core CPUs, it can introduce issues
in a multicore CPU. For example, with a multiprogrammed workload (i.e., when multiple cores
are executing threads that belong to different processes), one thread may tie up many channels at

the same time by accessing several consecutive cache blocks. This would increase the chance of
interference for any of the other threads trying to access data in memory, by increasing the like-
lihood that the channel will be busy. Worse off, if two different processes access several consecu-
tive cache blocks, this can generate a large number of bank conflicts (i.e., row conflicts) in DRAM
that could have been avoided with a row interleaving scheme. A non-interleaved memory (i.e.,
where consecutive rows map to the same bank) can reduce the probability of bank conflicts due
to interference, but at the expense of sacrificing memory-level parallelism for memory-intensive
applications.

A B C D E F G H
Consecutive Cache Blocks in Physical Address Space:

No Interleaving

Cache Block Interleaving

Row Interleaving

Channel 0

Channel 1

Channel 0

Channel 1

Channel 0

Channel 1

Bank 0

Bank 0

Bank 0

Bank 0

Bank 0

Bank 0

A B C D
E F G H

A
B

E
F

A B C D
E F G H

Bank 1

Bank 1

Bank 1

Bank 1

Bank 1

Bank 1

C
D

G
H

Figure 10: Example of how address interleaving schemes impact the placement of cache blocks
in main memory, for a series of cache blocks that are consecutive in the physical address space. A
specific interleaving scheme is chosen by determining which bits of the physical memory address
are used to index the different levels of the memory hierarchy (in this example, the channel, the
bank, the row, and the column).

Row Policy.
The row policy [5] determines whether a row in a bank should remain open once
the memory controller services all currently-queued requests for that bank. In an open-row pol-
icy, the row stays open in case future memory requests also access the same row (due to spatial
locality), avoiding the latency of re-opening (i.e., reactivating) the row when the next request to
the bank arrives. In a closed-row policy, the row is closed as soon as the currently-queued re-
quests for that bank are completed, under the assumption that new requests are likely to access a
different row, thus avoiding the row closing (i.e., precharging) latency when the next request to
the bank arrives. Variations of these policies exist, such as timeout policies that close the row a
given number of cycles after the last queued request is serviced. In a multicore CPU, the optimal
policy choice can depend on the workload executing on the CPU. For example, with a multipro-
grammed workload, the likelihood of the next access to the bank being to the same row decreases
compared to a single-core CPU, due to interference and competition across different processes.
However, with a multiprogrammed workload, the likelihood can potentially increase instead, as
multiple threads belonging to the same process may each access data in the same row, depending
on how data accesses are partitioned across threads.

Memory Scheduling.
The scheduling algorithm [5] determines which of the pending memory
requests to service next, which impacts the rows and banks that are currently active in DRAM.
As mentioned above, a DRAM read or write cannot be directly performed on the DRAM cells,
and can only perform the reads or writes on data in the row buffer of a bank (which practically
limits a bank to servicing at most one request at a time). This results in significant complexity
for scheduling memory requests, as the controller must consider many factors such as the time a
request has been waiting for, whether the target bank for each queued request is idle or is in the
middle of servicing another request, and whether the target bank has the target row currently
open (i.e., activated). Furthermore, while a memory controller can take advantage of bank-level
parallelism (BLP) to service requests to different banks concurrently, the physical bus wires of
the memory channel are shared across all banks belonging to the channel, as shown in Figure 9.
As a result, the scheduler must also stagger requests in a way that ensures exclusive access to
the memory channel bus for only one bank, when the bank needs to send data to or receive data
from the controller. Figure 11 shows how this staggering of memory requests can be coordinated
for two examples: (1) when multiple requests target different rows in the same bank (i.e., a bank
conflict), and must serialize the opening of each row; and (2) when multiple requests target dif-
ferent rows in different banks, which can exploit BLP to overlap multiple row openings, and must
serialize only the actual data transfer on the shared memory channel’s data bus.

B0R0C0

B0R1C0

B0R2C0

address bus

Open B0R0C0

Open B0R1C0

Open B0R2C0

DRAM activity

B0R0C0

B0R1C0

B0R2C0

data bus

time

Bank Conflict

B0R0C0

B1R1C0

B2R2C0

address bus

Open B0R0C0

Open B1R1C0

DRAM activity

Open B2R2C0

B0R0C0

B1R1C0

B2R2C0

data bus

time

Bank-Level Parallelism

Figure 11: Scheduling of multiple read requests when a bank conflict occurs (top), and when
there is bank-level parallelism that avoids a bank conflict (bottom). The notation BbRrCc indicates
a memory access to Bank b, Row r, Column c. This example assumes that all requests access the
same memory channel. The memory controller for the channel sends a request to the memory via
the address, bus just before it is safe to initiate the operation inside memory (e.g., opening a row).
The controller must ensure that operations to the same bank do not overlap and data transfers
from memory to the controller on the shared data bus do not overlap.

Ultimately, a scheduling algorithm enforces these many constraints by prioritizing currently-
queued requests based on a predefined policy and on the current state of the DRAM, and by en-
forcing a series of timing parameters that are declared as part of the specification of each DRAM
type (e.g., DDR5 [43], HBM [42]). A commonly-implemented algorithm is known as first-ready,
first-come first-serve (FR-FCFS) [71], which prioritizes requests to already-activated rows over
older requests. FR-FCFS does this to improve average memory access time (AMAT), as the time
required to activate a row, and to precharge (i.e., close) the row after requests are finished, can
both take as long as the read and write requests themselves [43]. Memory controllers in com-
mercial multicore CPUs continue to use FR-FCFS without introducing any notion of thread or
application awareness [5], which can exacerbate interference across threads (see Section 4.3).

4.3
Mitigating Interference

The combination of private caches and shared caches attempts to balance the impact of inter-
ference with the need to provision resources for worst-case behavior: private caches allow each
CPU core to manage a small working set of its data without first-order impacts of interference,
while the shared cache enables resource pooling to reduce the frequency of long-latency misses
to main memory for workloads with large data footprints. However, it is still possible for memory
interference, at the caches and/or at main memory, to negatively impact one or more cores. This
section looks at three such examples, as well as potential mechanisms to mitigate them.
Our first example examines how cache requests from one core can impact the management of
a private cache belonging to a different core. If the shared LLC is inclusive of upper-level private
caches, and one core evicts a cache block from the LLC belonging to a second core, the second core
will also have to evict that cache block from its private caches even though the private cache space
is not being used by the first core. To address this (as well as pollution from hardware prefetchers),
some multicore CPUs employ a non-inclusive or exclusive policy for the LLC or for the last private
cache level [4]. On a miss to main memory, the non-inclusive policy acts like the inclusive policy,
where a copy of the data is placed in the LLC as well as in the private cache(s). When a cache block
eviction takes place at the LLC, the non-inclusive policy acts like the exclusive policy, where the
eviction does not trigger an eviction in the upper-level private caches.
Our second example examines how shared cache utilization by one core can impact the avail-
able shared cache capacity, and thus the performance, for a different core. In a conventional
multicore CPU, shared resources are left unmanaged, i.e., there is no active mechanism to enforce
that each core receives a fair portion of the resources. This unmanaged approach is often useful
to allow the easy distribution of these resources across cores based on the heterogeneous needs of
the threads that each core is executing (e.g., in a two-core CPU, one core runs a thread that has a
large working set and uses up most of the LLC, while the other core runs a thread that has a small
working set and can make do with whatever capacity the first thread does not use). However,
when the heterogeneous needs are more extremely unbalanced, one or more of the threads may
incur significant slowdowns. In our example, if one greedy thread is using most of the LLC, cache
blocks belonging to other threads may constantly be evicted, hurting those threads’ performance
significantly. To address this, several works have proposed cache partitioning, where some or all
of the ways and/or sets of a cache are assigned to a specific core or thread. Strict cache partition-
ing could ensure that the cache blocks from the other threads in our example do not get evicted,

as the greedy thread would not be allowed to use partitions belonging to other threads. One
commercial implementation of cache partitioning is Intel’s Cache Allocation Technology [34].
Our third example examines how memory scheduling algorithms can introduce unintentional
slowdown for threads. Recall from Section 4.2 that the commonly-used FR-FCFS scheduling al-
gorithm does not account for any sort of thread or application awareness, and solely focuses on
reducing the number of row activations and precharge operations. While reducing activate and
precharge operations help decrease the AMAT for a thread that can exploit row locality, they can
unfairly slow down the other threads in a multicore CPU, by continuing to prioritize requests
from the thread whose row is already activated. In this example, one thread is generating many
loads and stores to the same DRAM row, which is currently activated, while the other threads each
have a single load that is waiting to access a different row in the same bank. FR-FCFS will look
at all of the queued requests, and prioritize the requests from the first thread because their target
row is already activated. This causes all of the requests from the other threads to wait longer
in the queue, and in extreme cases can lead to unintentional starvation for these threads. To ad-
dress this, researchers have proposed a number of memory schedulers that explicitly augment the
memory request metadata with a thread ID, and incorporate information about the thread into
the scheduling algorithms. As one example, the memory controller can use lightweight runtime
metrics to predict which threads are being slowed down due to memory interference, and can
prioritize requests from these threads before prioritizing row locality [64].

4.4
Cache Coherence

As mentioned in Section 3.2, each core in a multicore CPU has private caches in addition to a
shared cache. Similar to conventional single-core CPUs, these caches are typically configured to
be write-back caches. A write-back cache buffers updates to a cache block, by storing the updates
in the cache and marking the cache block as dirty. In a single-core CPU, these updates are not
made visible to lower cache/memory levels until the cache block is evicted from the current cache
level. Upon eviction of a cache block, if the block is marked as dirty, its contents are written to
the next lower level to preserve the most recent version of the data; otherwise, the block can
simply be dropped, as at least one lower level of the memory hierarchy also has the most recent
version of the data. For cache blocks that are written to frequently, write-back caches reduce
the amount of traffic these writes induce on lower levels of the cache hierarchy. A common
alternative, write-through caches, store the update in the cache and send every update to the
next lower level. However, write-through caches are not commonly employed in multicore CPUs
due to the impact of the increased write traffic on interference.

The Need for Coherency With Write-Back Caches.
In a single-core CPU, write-back caches
ensure that the CPU core sees the most recent version of the data for each cache block, as the core
always starts memory lookups from the top cache level in the memory hierarchy. However, with
multicore CPUs, a dirty cache block stored in one core’s private cache is not immediately visible to
other cores in the CPU. This is because if the same cache lookup procedure for single-core CPUs
is used, a multicore CPU’s core would access its own private caches and the shared last-level
cache, and not the private caches of other cores. If left unmodified, this can lead to correctness
issues, as one core may ignore and potentially incorrectly overwrite the updates from another
core.

To address the lack of visibility, multicore CPUs employ hardware mechanisms to support
cache coherence. Cache coherence techniques were initially developed for parallel systems with
multiple single-core CPUs, but the same basic techniques have become applied for multicore
CPUs. At a high level, a cache coherence mechanism ensures the following rules: (1) a write
operation to a memory address by a processor must (eventually) become visible to all processors;
and (2) if two processors write to the same memory address, all processors will observe the writes
in the same order. This enforcement is typically achieved by guaranteeing two properties: (1) at
any given time, at most one core is granted permissions to write to a memory address by the
coherence mechanism (note that these are different than the write permissions maintained by
virtual memory); and (2) when a core has been granted write permissions to a memory address,
any copies of that address held in other private caches are marked as stale, and cannot be used
again without first synchronizing data updates from the writing core. There are multiple cache
coherence protocols that enforce these properties in different ways, and a multicore CPU will typ-
ically implement one of these protocols as a fixed-function mechanism in hardware. Note that
cache coherence mechanisms are fully microarchitectural: as caches are part of the microarchitec-
ture and are (in theory) transparent to the programmer, the programmer expects the machine to
obey shared-memory model semantics, and a value written to a specific memory address should
be visible to all cores as soon as the write occurs.
Logically, a cache coherence protocol maintains a coherence state for each core for every mem-
ory address. The coherence state dictates the current permissions that the protocol has granted a
core for a particular memory address. As this would require a large amount of data to be stored
on chip, practical implementations of cache coherence make the following two optimizations.
First, coherence states are maintained at a cache block granularity, and not per byte (i.e., per
memory address). One artifact of block-based coherence management is false sharing [86]. If two
CPU cores are accessing two different memory addresses that belong to the same cache block,
the cache coherence protocol treats this as data that is shared by both cores, even though their
accesses are to different pieces of data. In the case where both cores are trying to write to these
pieces of data simultaneously, the cache block will ping-pong (i.e., move back and forth) between
the two cores, with one core invoking an invalidation for the other core any time it wants to
write, and vice versa. False sharing can be avoided only by ensuring that the two pieces of data
are mapped to different cache blocks (e.g., by having the programmer pad data structure sizes to
use up exact multiples of the cache block size). Second, if a cache block is not currently held by
a core in its private caches, the cache block is assumed to be in a coherence state designated as
invalid for that core (i.e., the core cannot currently read from or write to that cache block).

Exchanging Coherence Messages Between Cores.
The cache coherence protocol is typi-
cally triggered when a core wants to change its coherence state for a cache block, which can
happen for one of the three following actions: (1) the core accesses a cache block that it does
not currently have in its private caches, (2) the core wants to change its current permissions un-
der the coherence mechanism for the cache block, or (3) the core evicts the cache block from its
private caches. If the rules of the protocol require a state change for the action, this generates
a coherence message. The specific sequencing of messages is protocol-dependent, but typically
involves sending state upgrade/downgrade requests, and receiving acknowledgments and poten-

tially updated data values. There are two approaches to sending messages to a destination core:
snoopy coherence and directory-based coherence.
In snoopy cache coherence [29], cores share a bus, and each core maintains its own coherence
state metadata. Each core reads all cache coherence messages transmitted on the bus (i.e., it is
snooping on all messages) to see if it needs to react to the message (e.g., if it needs to write back
any dirty changes to a cache block, if it needs to invalidate the block). For example, if a core
wants to write to cache block x, it broadcasts a coherence message on the bus declaring its intent
to acquire write permissions. As only one core can have write permissions, every other core on
the bus will see the coherence message, and if a core has a copy of cache block x, it will invalidate
the block in all of its private caches. The other cores require some form of acknowledgment
mechanism to notify the requesting core that it has completed any necessary actions, or if it has
an up-to-date version of the data. Snoopy cache coherence is the simpler of the two approaches
to implement, and works effectively when the CPU has a relatively low number of CPU cores,
but the broadcast-based bus scales poorly as the core count increases, both due to the increased
bus latency/energy and increased contention due to message serialization on the bus.
Directory-based cache coherence [8] avoids the poor scaling of broadcasting by instead stor-
ing the coherence state metadata in a directory. When a core triggers a coherence message, the
message first goes to the directory, which stores the state of the cache block in all cores serviced
by the directory. One example implementation is to maintain a bitvector for each cache block
currently held by any of the cores, where bit i in the bitvector indicates whether core i currently
has a copy of the cache block. When the directory receives a coherence message, it looks up the
metadata for the requested block, and then dispatches follow-up messages to only those cores that
currently hold the cache block. While directory-based coherence is more complex to implement,
it exhibits scalability over snoopy coherence in multiple dimensions. First, as mentioned above,
coherence messages need to be transmitted to only the cores that currently hold the data, and
can be implemented using more scalable interconnection networks than a bus. Second, the direc-
tory can be partitioned into multiple slices, with each slice responsible for a subset of memory
addresses. Third, a CPU can implement multiple levels of directories, creating a directory hier-
archy that further reduces coherence message traffic and metadata storage requirements. This
improved scalability makes directory-based coherence a good fit when there are a large number
of cores in the CPU.

Coherence Protocol Examples.
As mentioned above, there are many specific instances of
cache coherence protocols. Figure 12 illustrates the state transition diagram of MSI [8], a popular
coherence protocol. MSI takes its name from the three possible states a cache block can be in:
(1) modified, which gives a core permissions to read from and write to the cache block; (2) shared,
which gives a core permissions to read from the cache block; and (3) invalid, which means that
the cache block is not in the cache (and the core that the cache corresponds to therefore cannot
read from or write to the block). For the sake of simplicity, let’s examine these states for a system
with four CPU cores, where each core has its own private L1 cache, and the cores all share a
single L2 cache. When a cache block is in the shared state, multiple L1 caches can hold identical
copies of the cache block. Since none of the cores have permissions to write to the cache block,
this ensures that any core reading the cache block has the most recent version of the data. When
a thread running on one of the cores wants to write to the cache block, it first sends a message to

the other cores, informing them to downgrade to the invalid state (i.e., to invalidate their copy of
the cache block, if they have one). Once the core receives acknowledgments of the invalidations,
it upgrades its own copy of the cache block to the modified state.12 This now ensures that only
this core has a copy of the cache block, and that the core can now safely perform its write. If
another core wants to read the now-modified cache block, it will send out a read request, which
will force the writing core to downgrade its cache block from the modified state to the shared
state, and to make the updates visible to the other cores.

I want to write
but don’t have a copy:
tell others to invalidate
and give me the data

M
I (and only I)
have a dirty
copy

I want to write:
tell others to invalidate

Someone else
wants to write
(or block is evicted)

Someone else
wants to read

S
I (and maybe
others) have a
clean copy

I
I don’t have a
copy (maybe
others do)

I want to read:
tell others to write back any updates

Someone else
wants to write
(or block is evicted)

Figure 12: MSI protocol: solid lines are upgrades, dotted lines are downgrades.

One drawback of MSI is that even when only one core has a copy of the cache block in the
shared state, it must wait for acknowledgments from all of the other cores before it can upgrade
this cache block to the modified state. This can potentially generate a large amount of unnecessary
coherence traffic, given the lack of other copies in the private caches. The MESI cache coherence
protocol [69] provides an optimization for this drawback, by introducing a fourth state called
exclusive, as shown in Figure 13. If a core reads a cache block into its private cache, and no other
private cache has a copy, the cache block will have an exclusive state, indicating that the core
can read from the block, and that no other private copy exists. If the core subsequently wants to
perform a write to the block, it can now silently upgrade the cache block (i.e., without sending
any coherence messages to other cores) to the modified state. To ensure correctness, if a second
core wants to read the cache block, the first core’s copy is downgraded from exclusive to shared,
indicating that there may be more than one core currently holding a copy of the block.

4.5
Memory Consistency Models

A key consideration in coordinating memory updates across cores is the need to present a globally
consistent view of these updates to all cores. While cache coherence ensures that updates made
by any one core to one unit of data are visible immediately to all cores, memory consistency [66]

12While not shown, practical cache coherence protocols implement additional transient states, to indicate an in-
progress upgrade/downgrade while waiting for other cores to complete their requested state changes.

I want to write:
no reason to tell others

I want to write
but don’t have a copy:
tell others to invalidate
and give me the data
E
I (and only I)
have a clean
copy

M
I (and only I)
have a dirty
copy

I want to write:
tell others to invalidate

I want to read,
and nobody has a copy

Someone else
wants to read
Someone else
wants to write
(or block is evicted)

Someone else
wants to read

Someone else
wants to write

S
I (and maybe
others) have a
clean copy

I
I don’t have a
copy (maybe
others do)

I want to read:
tell others to write back any updates

Someone else
wants to write
(or block is evicted)

Figure 13: MESI protocol: solid lines are upgrades, dotted lines are downgrades. Transitions that
are unchanged from MSI are grayed out.

deals with how requests are interleaved across multiple units of data. Unlike cache coherence,
which is a purely microarchitectural technique (i.e., transparent to the programmer) because it is
a result of only microarchitectural design choices, memory consistency is an architectural tech-
nique that must be exposed to the programmer, because data communication across threads is
determined by the programmer in both implicit and explicit ways. There are many different mem-
ory consistency models, where each memory consistency model defines which possible memory
interleavings can be observed by a core. Regardless of the consistency model, each core must
maintain an ordering of loads and stores that does not violate true (i.e., read after write) regis-
ter dependencies, and because caches are part of the shared-memory state, cache coherence is
implemented. This section examines three popular types of consistency models.
Sequential consistency (SC) [50] ensures that every core sees the same ordering (i.e., interleav-
ing) of individual memory operations. This is the equivalent of cores going one at a time when
performing a load or store, and that load or store is considered part of the shared-memory state
so that all cores see the effect (though not all cores need to see the effect immediately). SC is
often thought of as one of the most intuitive models, but given its need for a globally consistent
interleaving, it can require a high overhead for implementation, and is rarely used for modern
multicore CPUs.
Relaxed memory consistency models allow for some differences in orderings observed by each
core. One example of a relaxed model is total store ordering (TSO) [82], which was first developed
for the SPARC ISA and is used widely (albeit with some modifications) by the x86 ISA. In TSO,
a CPU core can observe its own write before other cores can, resulting in a slightly different
interleaving observed by each core. A key goal of TSO is to retain store buffers in multiprocessors.
For an out-of-order core, a store buffer holds stores that have been committed, but have yet to
be written to the caches. In SC, the store buffer is not considered part of the shared-memory
state, and memory speculation techniques that read data from the store buffer can require costly

mechanisms to squash and replay out-of-order load that violate the global interleaving. With
TSO’s relaxation, there is no need for such costly mechanisms, and the write buffer is considered
part of the shared-memory state.
An example of an even more relaxed model is weak ordering [18]. Weak ordering allows most
memory operations to be reordered, but uses programmer-invoked synchronization primitives to
explicitly define reordering boundaries. A popular synchronization primitive for weak ordering
is a fence, which is used to enforce orderings within a core (but does not explicitly synchronize
across cores, unlike a barrier). A fence has three guarantees: (1) all cores see the same exact
ordering of fence primitives, (2) all load and store instructions that come before the fence in
a thread must complete before the fence, and (3) no load or store instruction that comes after
the fence can complete until after fence takes place. What this means is that for the loads and
stores in between two fences, any ordering of them can possibly occur. The programmer can
explicitly insert more fences into a thread to enforce a stricter ordering. The Arm ISA is an
example architecture that makes use of weak ordering.
Please refer to a detailed discussion [66] for more information about these and other memory
consistency models.

5
Optimizing Operating Systems for Multicore CPUs

As mentioned in Section 2, multicore CPUs can make use of two types of parallelism: multi-
processing of multiple applications, and thread-level parallelism (TLP) within an application. In
order to best exploit these types of parallelism on multicore CPU hardware, operating systems
and user applications have evolved in a number of key ways. While these changes are not re-
quired to make use of multicore CPUs, they can allow developers to significantly improve the
overall performance and efficiency of the system. This section briefly touches on operating sys-
tem changes and optimizations for multicore CPUs.
To facilitate our explanations, these software optimizations will be explained from the per-
spective of threads. As a simple broad definition, a thread is a sequence of CPU instructions from
a program, and serves as the basic unit of scheduling for the operating system. Generally speak-
ing, when a program starts executing, that specific executing instance is known as a process, and
a process can consist of one or more threads of execution.

Scheduling Threads.
One of the many tasks that an operating system (OS) is responsible for
is scheduling threads from all currently-running processes. For a single-core CPU without mul-
tithreading, the CPU can execute only one thread at any given time. As discussed in Section 2.2,
the OS maintains the illusion of concurrent thread execution by time-sharing the CPU. At the
end of a scheduling quantum, the OS uses a predefined scheduling policy to select which of the
active threads will execute on the CPU for the next quantum. For the sake of simplicity, let us
assume for now that the OS selected a new thread that is just starting its execution. The selected
thread is then assigned to the CPU’s hardware context, and all of the CPU’s state for that thread
(e.g., program counter, registers, predictor history) are initialized to the starting state. The thread
then executes until the end of the quantum, unless the thread is preempted early (e.g., to execute
an exception handler).

Assuming the typical conditions that no early preemption took place and that the thread has
not yet finished executing, at the end of the quantum, the OS invokes the thread scheduler to
select the thread for the next quantum. If the selected thread is different from the currently-
running thread, the OS invokes a preemption of the running thread, which is known as a context
switch. During a context switch, the OS copies the CPU state associated with the thread being
preempted into memory, and loads in the CPU state for the thread being run next from memory.
From the perspective of the thread, the context switch gives the thread the illusion that it never
stopped executing. From the perspective of a user, PCs can often give them the illusion that all
of their threads are running concurrently on a single-core CPU, by rapidly context switching
between them, as the scheduling quantum is on the order of milliseconds, and is imperceptible
to humans for the typical number of concurrently-running threads.
To extend thread scheduling for multicore CPUs, the individual cores are each exposed to
the OS. As an n-core CPU without multithreading has n hardware contexts, the OS can sched-
ule n threads for every quantum.13 Conventionally, OS schedulers treated hardware contexts as
identical to one another, but this introduces two challenges in modern multicore CPUs.
First, while a context switch preserves and restores CPU state for a thread, this state does
not typically include the contents of the cache, because cache blocks are meant to be quickly-
accessible copies of data that is available in other parts of the system. However, it can be bene-
ficial for a thread to be reassigned to a hardware context that it was previously scheduled on, as
the thread can take advantage of data that it had previously cached. Conventional scheduling ap-
proaches would disregard this, and assign the thread to any available context. Processor affinity,
sometimes referred to as CPU pinning, overcomes this by allowing a user to assign a thread for
execution on only the user-specified hardware contexts (e.g., the user assigns a thread to only one
CPU core). The OS scheduler obeys the processor affinity assignments, ensuring that the thread
executes only on the selected contexts.
Second, as discussed further in Section 7.2, modern multicore CPUs no longer have homoge-
neous cores. As a result, the choice of hardware context to assign to a thread can have a significant
impact on its performance and energy consumption (e.g., assigning a thread to a big core when
it needs only a little core). Early systems with two types of cores made the difference between
cores transparent to the OS: a single hardware context was associated with both a big core and a
little core, and the hardware would use the CPU frequency setting chosen by the OS for the CPU
(see Controlling CPU Core Frequency below) to decide whether the thread should run on the big
core or on the little core. Modern systems can have more than two types of CPU cores, and often
expose all of the CPU cores directly to the OS. To manage these cores efficiently, OSes now in-
clude heterogeneity-aware schedulers, such as the Energy Aware Scheduling approach available
in modern versions of the Linux kernel [54].

Controlling CPU Core Frequency.
As introduced in Section 3.1, multicore CPUs expose the
ability to perform per-core dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS). In modern systems,
the voltage and frequency setting for each core is chosen by the OS. CPU manufacturers expose
the DVFS capabilities as a series of frequency steps, where the OS chooses a target frequency

13When a CPU supports m-way multithreading, each way is typically exposed to the OS as its own hardware
context, meaning that a n-core CPU with m-way multithreading exposes n × m hardware contexts.

based on certain properties, and the CPU uses the selected frequency step to control the voltage
and frequency of the core.
While specific implementations vary, this section will focus on the Linux kernel implementa-
tion due to its readily-available documentation. Linux includes a series of governors [90], which
are policies that the OS uses to select a frequency setting for a CPU. Some governors, such as
performance or powersave, constantly run a CPU at a fixed frequency (for the two examples, max-
imum or minimum, respectively). Other governors, such as ondemand and conservative, use basic
thread statistics such as load and idle time to select the frequency. Newer governors, such as
schedutil, extract information about which threads were scheduled for the upcoming scheduling
quantum to determine the frequency. In addition to these built-in governors, developers can cre-
ate custom governor policies for their systems. A recent addition to the Linux kernel, Capacity
Aware Scheduling [53], combines core heterogeneity information with frequency settings chosen
by the governor to guide hardware context assignment during thread scheduling.

Parallelizing Programs.
On the application side, there are two ways to take advantage of the
parallelism and efficiency offered by multicore CPUs. The first method is to rewrite programs as
multithreaded applications. Instead of writing a program as a fully-sequential series of functions,
a programmer can identify opportunities to perform some parts of the application concurrently.
The programmer can use threading libraries to either (1) explicitly spawn these parallel parts into
independent threads, or (2) demarcate regions of the program that inform an advanced library
to automatically generate threads. Note that threads do not have to be fully independent, and
that programmers can use synchronization primitives to coordinate execution across threads (e.g.,
locks to protect critical section execution, barriers to synchronize task or sub-task completion),
as well as shared memory or message passing to exchange information between threads. While
this chapter does not go into multithreaded programming in detail, there are other works [22,59]
that provide in-depth coverage of parallel programming techniques and frameworks.
The second method is often known as multiprogrammed execution, where multiple indepen-
dent processes execute concurrently on the CPU. With multiprogrammed execution, it is possible
to use all of the cores in a multicore CPU even if all of the applications are single-threaded, by
allowing the processes to execute in parallel. Most operating systems enable users to launch mul-
tiple processes concurrently, and when a process starts (initially with one thread), the OS adds
the process’ thread to the list of all active threads for the OS to schedule (see Scheduling Threads
above). If a process is multithreaded, it will spawn additional threads over time, which the OS
will also add to its list of active threads. The OS scheduler will typically not distinguish between
threads belonging to the same process and threads from other processes, and will schedule as
many threads as there are hardware contexts.

6
Evaluating Multicore CPUs

While conventional metrics such as speedup have been widely used in the architecture com-
munity for decades, several challenges make them difficult to directly apply to multicore CPU
evaluations. This section provides a summary of key challenges for performance measurement,
and then discuss popular metrics that overcome these challenges. It also briefly discusses metrics
related to power and energy, given their emphasis throughout the lifetime of multicore CPUs.

Multithreaded Application Performance.
During the evaluation of multithreaded applica-
tions, an important challenge is factoring in the synchronization overhead. Due to the non-
deterministic nature of synchronization, multiple runs of the same program on the same machine,
with identical data sets and an identical number of threads, can have different total runtimes, and
can have different total instruction counts (e.g., a thread spinning as it waits to acquire a lock
will execute additional instructions for each time it checks the lock variable). As a result, it is im-
portant to (1) compare equivalent amounts of work performed, as opposed to specific instruction
counts (especially in architectural simulators that tend to execute only parts of a program); and
(2) execute the configuration for each data point multiple times, and report a mean (ideally with
error bars) instead of the results of a single run.
For a fixed amount of work (e.g., an entire application, a multithreaded kernel such as an
entire parallel section of an application), the best measurement for comparison is the total wall
clock execution time (i.e., the time from when the application/kernel starts, to the time the last
thread finishes). While CPU cycle counts can act as a proxy for execution time, one must take care
to use the global cycle count, and not a per-thread cycle count that might not track time during
which a thread went to sleep (e.g., to wait for a lock). To understand the benefits of parallelism
when a program uses N CPU cores, a common metric that is used is parallel speedup, S(N):

S(N) = Ts

(4)

Tp

where Tp is the total execution time of the parallel version of the program for N cores, and Ts
is the total execution time of the sequential version of the program (and not the parallel version
with one core). The equation uses the sequential version of the program to ensure that parallel
speedup captures the overheads of synchronization. As a result, S(1) can often be less than 1. Note
that unlike with single-thread applications, the IPC (instructions per cycle) of a program should
not be used as a substitute for execution time, as IPC values can be skewed by synchronization
traffic and other non-deterministic behavior.
A related metric is parallel efficiency, E(N):

E(N) =
Ts
Tp × N
(5)

For parallel efficiency, a value of 1 indicates no overheads due to parallelization (i.e., the appli-
cation is making full use of all cores), whereas values significantly lower than 1 indicate high
overheads due to issues such as synchronization or serial execution.

Multiprogrammed Workload Performance.
Multiprogrammed workloads (i.e., a bundle of
independent, concurrently executing applications) are unable to employ the performance met-
rics used by multithreaded applications because the different applications are working to com-
plete separate tasks. As a result, the applications in a workload can exhibit significant hetero-
geneity. For example, a four-application workload may have two of the applications that are
compute-intensive (and thus have high IPCs), while the other two applications are memory in-
tensive (and thus have low IPCs). If one were to use an aggregate metric of total execution time
or the sum of IPCs (e.g., for comparing several potential system improvements to decide which
one to implement), the metric may unfairly bias improvements to one class of applications (e.g.,

compute-intensive applications) over the other. To avoid this bias when measuring overall sys-
tem performance for a multiprogrammed workload, it is important to use metrics that attempt to
normalize the relative benefits to each application, though there are several ways to perform this
normalization [21].
Related to this is the issue of fairness. As the applications in a multiprogrammed workload are
independent of each other, one application’s resource usage can generate interference that slows
down the other applications that are sharing the multicore CPU, compared to if those applications
ran alone on the CPU. For any one application in the workload, its slowdown is defined in terms
of its performance when running alone on the CPU compared to its performance when the CPU
is shared with other applications [46,64]:14

slowdown = IPCalone

(6)

IPCshared

By using a ratio of IPCs, the slowdown metric normalizes away the inherent compute-intensive
or memory-intensive behavior of each application, and reports what fraction of the application’s
performance was lost due to interference. A system is unfair if it slows down some applications
significantly more than others.
There are two metrics that can quantify (un)fairness. The first is maximum slowdown, which
simply says that the worst slowdown experienced by any one application is an indication of
unfairness due to interference, and that a smaller maximum slowdown is more equitable [10]. The
second defines fairness as the ratio between the best slowdown and worst slowdown experienced
by applications in the workload [21,27]:

fairness = min
i,j
slowdowni
slowdownj
= mini slowdowni

(7)

maxj slowdownj

where i and j are members of the set of all applications in the workload. Informally, a fairness of 1
indicates that all applications are experiencing an equal slowdown, while at the other extreme, a
fairness of 0 indicates that at least one application is experiencing starvation. Note that unfairness
in this case is defined as the inverse of fairness.
Aggregate performance metrics for multiprogrammed workloads incorporate some notion of
both overall system throughput and fairness, in an attempt to remove the bias mentioned above
that can arise from using absolute IPCs. A popular metric is weighted speedup (WS) [21, 79],
which sums up the normalized speedups (i.e., the inverse of slowdown) of each application i in
the workload to represent system throughput:

1
slowdowni

IPCshared

WS =
X

IPCalone
=
X

(8)

i

i

A larger value of WS is better, as it indicates higher system throughput (i.e., lower aggregate
impacts of interference). Note that for an n-application workload, WS typically ranges between
0 and n, indicating that the metric is dependent on the number of applications (and often, by

14To simplify the discussion of multiprogrammed workload metrics, this section assumes that each application is
single-threaded, which allows us to use IPC in the equations (as there is no synchronization overhead). For mul-
tithreaded applications in a multiprogrammed workload, IPC should be replaced by total execution time for that
application.

proxy, the number of cores), as this represents a throughput for a specific system. As a result,
when comparing two systems and reporting improvements due to a system modification, one
should typically report a ratio of weighted speedups (occasionally referred to as WS improvement,
although this is sometimes confusingly reported as just WS in several papers):

WS improvement =
WSafter modification
WSbefore modification

(9)

There is some debate about whether WS effectively captures unfairness, which has led sev-
eral researchers to use the harmonic mean (HM) of speedups [21, 56] (sometimes referred to as
harmonic speedup) in place of or in addition to WS:

HM =
n
P
i
IPCalone
IPCshared
=
n
P
i slowdowni

(10)

HM represents the average slowdown in a user response (i.e., the turnaround time for an output
produced by the application) for each application in the workload due to interference [21]. Like
with WS, higher is better, and to compare two systems and report an improvement, one should
calculate the ratio of HM values for the two systems.

Power and Energy.
While power and energy are related, they represent different limiting fac-
tors experienced by modern computers. Power (P) represents a rate of work being completed,
and can be calculated as a function of current (I) and voltage (V):

P = I × V
(11)

At a high level, power in a CPU can be broken down into a dynamic component (e.g., the power
consumed due to the active switching of transistors to perform work, short-circuit power con-
sumed during gate switching when transistors temporarily connect the high voltage rail to ground
due to transistor timing variation) and a static component (e.g., the leakage of power due to im-
perfections in the switching behavior of a transistor). Section 3.1 briefly discusses components
that impact dynamic power. Note that in the past, dynamic power was orders of magnitude larger
than static power, so static power was thought of as a trivial factor in total power consumption.
Today, because decades of Dennard scaling translated to significant dynamic power reductions,
static power makes up a non-trivial fraction of total CPU power. Power consumption has a direct
correlation with thermal dissipation, and is used as a proxy to quantify the heat generated by the
CPU. The areal power density, which divides the power by the surface area of the CPU die, is used
to determine how aggressive thermal cooling solutions (e.g., heatsinks, liquid cooling, fans) need
to be to remove dissipated heat from the CPU and keep the die within safe thermal operating
limits. While areal power density is used at design time to provision heat dissipation capacity,
the CPU makes use of temperature readings from multiple sensors embedded at various locations
in both the CPU chip and the motherboard to dynamically control heat dissipation management,
including cooling intensity (e.g., fan speed) and CPU power throttling.
While power consumption was the key concern during the early years of multicore CPUs,
energy emerged as a first-order concern during the 2010s. Energy (E) is the total electrical cost
of performing a given amount of work, and can be calculated as a function of power:

E = P × t
(12)

where t is the time required to complete the defined amount of work. Challenges associated
with two extreme ends of computing platforms have resulted in the growing emphasis on energy
consumption, in addition to power consumption. First, portable computers such as laptops and
smartphones are battery-constrained, as their available uptime depends on the total energy ca-
pacity of the computer’s battery and the amount of energy that the system (including the CPU)
consumes for running applications. Second, the large number of servers in data centers and cloud
computing environments can result in exorbitant financial and environmental costs to provide
enough energy to perform user services. In both cases, reducing the total energy used for a given
application can result in more availability at a lower overall cost. A related metric of interest is
energy efficiency, which summarizes the energy used for a single operation (e.g., an instruction, a
microkernel), though one downside of energy efficiency is the difficulty of defining an operation
in an equal way across platforms (e.g., two CPUs with different ISAs may not have equivalent
instructions). Several modern multicore CPUs contain ISA-compatible cores of heterogeneous
size and capability (see Section 7.2), and dynamic energy and/or energy efficiency metrics based
on the characteristics of a thread are used to select which of the heterogeneous cores will execute
the thread.

7
The Evolution of Multicore CPUs

In the years that have elapsed since the introduction of multicore CPUs, there have been a number
of innovations to the general microarchitecture described in Section 3. While some of these inno-
vations have been limited to specific manufacturers or models, others have become commonplace
across modern CPUs. This section highlights three of the most significant shifts in multicore CPU
design, and leaves the exploration of other innovations as an exercise for the reader. These three
shifts are finding widespread acceptance in contemporary multicore CPUs: (1) the integration of
specialized components on-chip alongside the general-purpose CPU cores into what are known
as systems-on-chip (SoCs); (2) the diversification of the constituent cores in a multicore CPU; and
(3) the advent of composable chiplets that can allow for the easy integration of many smaller
silicon dies in a single chip.

7.1
Systems-on-Chip

Just as the limits of areal power density and thermal dissipation were a key motivator for the
rise of multicore CPUs, a new pressure point that came to prominence a few years later ush-
ered in the next key change. The emergence of the smartphone drove a need to reduce to-
tal energy consumption, given the limited battery capacities that were available in a portable
form factor. To maximize energy efficiency, smartphones made use of systems-on-chip (SoCs). A
system-on-chip tightly integrates many different components, which conventionally would have
been implemented using multiple chips for desktop and server computers, into a single chip.
Early SoC examples date back to the mid-1970s, such as the Intel 5810 [37] introduced in 1974,
and were designed to minimize battery consumption in then-new electronic wristwatches. Over
time, platform-specific SoCs became relatively commonplace in the embedded systems commu-
nity. Early smartphones such as the original Apple iPhone, from 2007, made use of Samsung SoCs

that contained a single Arm CPU core, a graphics processing unit (GPU), and caches integrated
onto a single chip [58].
As the functionality and ubiquity of the smartphone expanded, their underlying SoCs incor-
porated significantly more components, including more CPU cores. At a high level, the goal of
these additional components is to introduce specialization for commonly-performed operations,
in order to significantly improve the efficiency of these operations compared to executing them
on a general-purpose CPU core. Figure 14 shows several key components of the Apple A17 Pro
SoC [3], which started production in 2023 for use in the iPhone 15 Pro series of smartphones. As
the figure shows, the SoC contains six CPU cores (which are heterogeneous; see Section 7.2), a
GPU, multiple fixed-function accelerators (a neural engine for machine learning inference, an im-
age signal processor for photo processing, a video codec engine for video recording and stream-
ing, a display engine for screen image generation), I/O interfaces (including a dedicated USB
controller), a system-level cache (an LLC that is available to the CPU, GPU, and all accelerators),
and four LPDDR5X memory controllers.

DRAM

Engine
Display

Video Codec

DRAM

Ctrlr.

Engine

Ctrlr.

2
High-Performance

6-Core
Graphics
Processing Unit
(GPU)

CPU Cores

3.78 GHz

4 High-Efficiency

CPU Cores

2.11 GHz

System-Level Cache

(SLC)
Shared SRAM

I/O
Intf.

USB
Ctrlr.

Image
Signal
Proc.
(ISP)

16-Core
Neural Engine

DRAM

DRAM

Ctrlr.

Ctrlr.

Figure 14: Selected components in the Apple A17 Pro system-on-chip. Note that components
may not be to scale with each other.

The process of identifying which components to include in the SoC (beyond the basic CPU and
GPU) makes use of profiling tools. These tools can monitor the performance (and often the energy)
of an existing chip as one or more applications execute. To do this, modern profiling tools make
use of hardware performance counters, which are registers built into the chip logic to track vari-
ous events taking place during execution. For SoC design, profiling can identify the applications
or application kernels that are bottlenecked by the existing chip, which become candidates for

acceleration using dedicated SoC components. Of these candidates, a subset of them are chosen
for dedicated acceleration based on a combination of factors, including the frequency of applica-
tion/kernel usage, the area required for a fixed-function accelerator, available chip area, power
and energy budgets, and the availability of existing accelerator designs (including the availability
of third-party designs known as IP cores, where IP stands for intellectual property). Note that
even among state-of-the-art SoCs that target the same platform, the exact components can vary.
As one example, Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 SoC [70] for smartphones integrates a 5G cell
modem, WiFi and Bluetooth transceivers, and security accelerators in the chip, and makes use of
a different combination of heterogeneous cores than the A17 Pro.

7.2
Heterogeneous CPU Cores

As discussed in Section 7.1, a key motivator for introducing fixed-function accelerators in SoCs
is to improve energy efficiency for commonly-performed operations. Even with these accelera-
tors, there remains a need to execute code using a general-purpose CPU core (e.g., less common
operations, OS system calls, irregular workloads that are more difficult to accelerate). Using the
smartphone as a motivating example, the CPU cores in a smartphone SoC have seen significantly
increasing complexity in their designs (e.g., more sophisticated predictors, deeper speculation,
larger superscalar widths [30]), to meet the increasing demands of smartphone applications that
have become more sophisticated over the years. While larger CPU cores can enable efficient
execution of modern compute-heavy applications compared to smaller cores, the increased core
complexity (along with associated increases in leakage and clock power) become more ineffi-
cient for more memory-bound applications that cannot make effective use of these additional
resources.
A seminal study in 2003 illustrated how having a heterogeneous combination of large cores
and small cores in a single multicore CPU is significantly more energy efficient than the use of
homogeneous (i.e., identical) cores [49]. If all of the cores maintain the same instruction set ar-
chitecture (ISA), an application can migrate from a large core to a smaller core when it enters
a more memory-bound phase, and can migrate back to the larger core when it enters a more
compute-bound phase. Arm introduced their first CPU cores designed for a heterogeneous mul-
ticore CPU in 2011, under the name big.LITTLE [31]. The first big.LITTLE pairing combined large
Cortex-A15 cores with small Cortex-A7 cores, where the Cortex-A15 cores could achieve up to
3.0× the performance of the Cortex-A7 cores, but the Cortex-A7 could achieve up to 3.8× the
energy efficiency, for selected benchmarks. For what Arm defined as low- to mid-range work-
loads, the Cortex-A7 was expected to execute these workloads with a dramatic reduction in power
consumption, with no expected loss in performance compared to the Cortex-A15. Initially, core
heterogeneity was hidden from the system software, with the CPU hardware transparently mi-
grating applications between a big core and a paired little core. This meant that for any big–little
pair, one of the cores was idle. Today, core heterogeneity is exposed to the OS scheduler, as
discussed in Section 5.
Since the commercial introduction of heterogeneous CPU cores, they have become common-
place in modern multicore CPUs. The example A17 Pro CPU from Apple, shown in Figure 14,
contains two types of CPU cores [3]: (1) a pair of large high-performance cores, and (2) four
smaller high-efficiency cores. Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 CPU contains three distinct types
of CPU cores [70]: (1) a single large prime core that runs at a frequency of up to 3.4 GHz; (2) five

performance cores, large but notably smaller than the prime core, that run at a frequency of up
to 3.2 GHz; and (3) two small efficiency cores that run at a frequency of up to 2.3 GHz. While
the usage of heterogeneous CPU cores first became popular for mobile SoCs, it can now be seen
in a wide range of modern multicore CPUs. For example, Intel’s 12th generation of Core CPUs
introduced heterogeneous CPU cores (named P-cores and E-cores) for desktop computers [75].

7.3
Chiplet-Based Multicore Design

Beyond the cores themselves, the success of SoCs have demonstrated the benefits of maximizing
energy efficiency through directed specialization. However, there remains a tension between high
degrees of specialization and non-recurring engineering (NRE) costs, such as those involved with
design, layout, and verification. As a simple motivating example, let’s revisit the tiled multicore
design from Section 3.1. While tiling helps reduce NRE costs, the tile is a fixed design: for one
core, there is a fixed amount of L1 instruction and data caches, L2 cache, and potentially LLC
slice. If a manufacturer wants to adapt this tile for a platform whose workloads do not exhibit
significant locality, they may want to significantly reduce the cache sizes, but doing so requires
a new tile to be designed and verified. Moreover, the die that is etched for a multicore CPU will
have a fixed number of tiles laid out, again restricting the flexibility of the CPU and requiring
non-trivial NRE costs if a die with a different core/tile count is needed.
The advent of chiplets provides a new way to compose a multicore CPU in a more modular
fashion, avoiding some of these NRE costs. A chiplet is a small die that contains a subset of the
functionality that would be contained in a standard die. Instead of laying out a multicore CPU
design using a monolithic die, designers can design smaller chiplets with individual components,
such as cores or caches. For example, in place of a single die containing eight cores and their
associated caches, a chip for a multicore CPU could be composed using eight core chiplets, eight
L1 cache chiplets, eight L2 cache chiplets, and 16 LLC slice chiplets. If the manufacturer now
wants a multicore CPU with fewer cores and larger caches, they can reuse the chiplets to compose
a chip with two core chiplets, 16 of the L1 and L2 cache chiplets each, and 64 LLC slice chiplets.
While chiplets are one example of a broader concept called multi-chip modules (MCMs), which has
been around for decades, it was conventionally difficult to have more than a handful of dies in an
MCM due to packaging costs and alignment issues. Recent advances in interposer design, where
an interposer provides a substrate with many short-distance wires to connect dies together, have
reduced manufacturing costs, complexity, and faults for assembling many dies in one MCM.
Chiplets offer four advantages for manufacturing. First, as already discussed, chiplets allow
for modular components that can be reused and resized after the dies have been fabricated, at
low cost. Second, chiplets can allow for dies fabricated using different manufacturing process
technologies to be connected together into a single package (this is known as heterogeneous in-
tegration). If, for example, the cache does not need to be manufactured using the state-of-the-
art manufacturing process, manufacturers can reduce costs by fabbing the chip using an older,
cheaper process. Third, overall yield increases, because a silicon fault is now isolated to a much
smaller chiplet, which can be replaced at much lower cost than disposing of an entire die. Fourth,
with the breakdown of Dennard scaling [13,14], dies are now growing in size to continue scaling
up the total transistor count, but these sizes are approaching the reticle limits (i.e., the largest
possible chip that can be etched) of our lithography equipment. Chiplets can overcome these

limits by allowing for multiple larger chiplet dies to be composed into a package, where the total
area of the chiplets is significantly larger than what any one die could be.
Several manufacturers have started incorporating chiplet-based design for multicore CPUs.
AMD has been responsible for significant innovation in the area of chiplets and interposer de-
sign, and has been manufacturing chiplet-based multicore CPUs starting with the first-generation
EPYC CPUs in 2017 [65]. Figure 15 shows die shots of the AMD EPYC 7702 CPU, released in 2019,
which consists of nine chiplets: eight core complex dies (CCDs), fabricated in a 7 nm process, with
eight cores (and their private caches and LLC slices) per CCD; and a single I/O die in the cen-
ter, fabricated in a 14 nm process, with memory and I/O controllers. Apple and Intel have also
announced the incorporation of chiplet-based design into their latest multicore CPUs [72,78].

Figure 15: Lidded, delidded, and infrared views of the AMD EPYC 7702 CPU and its chiplets [26].

8
Conclusion

The rise of multicore CPUs highlighted a key shift in the computer architecture community, as
concerns about thermal dissipation and limitations of ILP hastened a collective change in mindset
about the importance of power and the potential of parallel processing. Innovations in multicore
CPU design have led to reduced design and verification effort, support for specialized hardware
accelerators, and increased composability of modular components. Today, multicore CPUs can
be found across most modern computers, ranging from embedded platforms and smartphones,
through personal laptops and desktops, to large-scale distributed computing environments. Com-
bined with the emergence of simplified parallel programming frameworks, multicore CPUs have
led to commonplace exploitation of thread-level parallelism, delivering significant performance
improvements while maintaining reasonable power and energy budgets. Multicore CPUs are
expected to continue evolving over the next several decades, as recent trends towards CPU spe-
cialization (particularly in the modern CPU landscape with systems-on-chip and chiplet-based
fabrication) open up new opportunities for maximizing the efficiency and performance of the
next generation of computing platforms.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to Ryan Wong, Sudhanshu Agarwal, Yiqiu Sun, and Minh S. Q. Truong for reviewing
multiple versions of this chapter and providing helpful feedback.

References

[1] G. M. Amdahl, “Validity of the Single Processor Approach to Achieving Large-Scale Com-
puting Capabilities,” in SJCC, 1967.

[2] J. P. Anderson, S. A. Hoffman, J. Shifman, and R. J. Williams, “D825 — A Multiple-Computer
System for Command & Control,” in FJCC, 1962.

[3] Apple Inc., “Apple Event — September 12, 2023,”
2023.

[4] L. Backes and D. A. Jim´enez, “The Impact of Cache Inclusion Policies on Cache Management
Techniques,” in MEMSYS, 2019.

[5] R. Balasubramonian, Innovations in the Memory System. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2019.

[6] R. Bitirgen, E. ˙Ipek, and J. F. Mart´ınez, “Coordinated Management of Multiple Interacting
Resources in Chip Multiprocessors: A Machine Learning Approach,” in ISCA, 2008.

[7] D. Boggs, A. Baktha, J. Hawkins, D. T. Marr, J. A. Miller, P. Roussel, R. Singhal, B. Toll,
and K. Venkatraman, “The Microarchitecture of the Intel® Pentium® 4 Processor on 90 nm
Technology,” Intel Technol. J., Feb. 2004.

[8] L. M. Censier and P. Feautrier, “A New Solution to Coherence Problems in Multicache Sys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. Comput., Dec. 1978.

[9] F. J. Corbat´o, M. Merwin-Daggett, and R. C. Daley, “An Experimental Time-Sharing System,”
in SJCC, 1962.

[10] R. Das, O. Mutlu, T. Moscibroda, and C. R. Das, “Application-Aware Prioritization Mecha-
nisms for On-Chip Networks,” in MICRO, 2009.

[11] V. De and S. Borkar, “Technology and Design Challenges for Low Power and High Perfor-
mance,” in DAC, 1999.

[12] T. J. Dekker, “History of Dekker’s Algorithm for Mutual Exclusion,” in Tales of Electrologica,
G. Alberts and J. F. Groote, Eds.
Springer Cham, 2022.

[13] R. H. Dennard, F. H. Gaensslen, L. Kuhn, and H.-N. Yu, “Design of Micron MOS Switching
Devices,” in IEDM, 1972.

[14] R. H. Dennard, F. H. Gaensslen, H.-N. Yu, V. L. Rideout, E. Bassous, and A. R. LeBlanc,
“Design of Ion-Implanted MOSFET’s With Very Small Physical Dimensions,” J. Solid-State
Circuits, Oct. 1974.

[15] E. W. Dijkstra, “Over de sequentialiteit van procesbeschrijvingen,” 1962, EWD35, circulated
privately.

[16] E. W. Dijkstra, “Cooperating Sequential Processes,” in Programming Languages: NATO Ad-
vanced Study Institute, F. Genuys, Ed.
Academic Press, 1968.

[17] P. Dreyfus, “System Design of the Bull Gamma 60,” in WJCC, 1958.

[18] M. Dubois, C. Scheurich, and F. A. Briggs, “Memory Access Buffering in Multiprocessors,”
in ISCA, 1986.

[19] S. W. Dunwell, “Design Objectives for the IBM Stretch Computer,” in EJCC, 1956.

[20] H. Esmaeilzadeh, E. Blem, R. S. Amant, K. Sankaralingam, and D. Burger, “Dark Silicon and
the End of Multicore Scaling,” in ISCA, 2011.

[21] S. Eyerman and L. Eechkout, “System-Level Performance Metrics for Multiprogram Work-
loads,” IEEE Micro, May–Jun. 2008.

[22] M. N. Farooqi, M. Abduljabbar, V. Beltran, X. Teruel, R. Ferrer, X. Martorell, and M. Peric`as,
“Parallel Programming Models,” in Handbook of Computer Architecture, A. Chattopadhyay,
Ed.
Springer Nature Singapore, 2022.

[23] M. Fillo, S. W. Keckler, W. J. Dally, N. P. Carter, A. Chang, Y. Gurevich, and W. S. Lee, “The
M–Machine Multicomputer,” in MICRO, 1995.

[24] M. J. Flynn, “Very High-Speed Computing Systems,” Proc. IEEE, Dec. 1966.

[25] D. J. Frank, R. H. Dennard, E. Nowak, P. M. Solomon, Y. Taur, and H.-S. P. Wong, “Device
Scaling Limits of Si MOSFETs and Their Application Dependencies,” Proc. IEEE, Mar. 2001.

[26] F.
Fritz,
“AMD/Zen2/EPYC/Rome,”

albums/72157715067973156/, 2019, photo album.

[27] R. Gabor, S. Weiss, and A. Mendelson, “Fairness and Throughput in Switch on Event Multi-
threading,” in MICRO, 2006.

[28] A. Glew, “MLP Yes! ILP No!” in ASPLOS WACI, 1998.

[29] J. R. Goodman, “Using Cache Memory to Reduce Processor-Memory Traffic,” in ISCA, 1983.

[30] B. Grayson, J. Rupley, G. Zuraski Jr., E. Quinnell, D. A. Jim´enez, T. Nakra, P. Kitchin, R. Hens-
ley, E. Brekelbaum, V. Sinha, and A. Ghiya, “Evolution of the Samsung Exynos CPU Microar-
chitecture,” in ISCA, 2020.

[31] P. Greenhalgh, “Big.LITTLE Processing With ARM Cortex™-A15 & Cortex-A7,” ARM Ltd.,
White Paper, 2011.

[32] J. L. Gustafson, “Reevaluating Amdahl’s Law,” Commun. ACM, May 1988.

[33] M. Hanawa, T. Nishimukai, O. Nishii, M. Suzuki, K. Yano, M. Hiraki, S. Shukuri, and
T. Nishida, “On-Chip Multiple Superscalar Processors With Secondary Cache Memories,”
in ICCD, 1991.

[34] A. Herdrich, E. Verplanke, P. Autee, R. Illikkal, C. Gianos, R. Singhal, and R. Iyer, “Cache
QoS: From Concept to Reality in the Intel® Xeon® Processor E5-2600 v3 Product Family,” in
HPCA, 2016.

[35] G. Hinton, “Key Nehalem Choices,” talk at Stanford Univ., Feb. 2010.

[36] M. Huang, M. Mehalel, R. Arvapalli, and S. He, “An Energy Efficient 32-nm 20-MB Shared
On-Die L3 Cache for Intel® Xeon® Processor E5 Family,” JSSC, August 2013.

[37] Intel Corp., 5810A Single Chip LCD Time/Seconds/Date Watch Circuit, 1976, datasheet, in Data
Catalog 1976.

[38] Intel Corp., i486 Microprocessor, Nov. 1989, datasheet, Order Number 240440-002.

[39] Intel Corp.,
“Intel Pentium III Processor 600 MHz,
512K Cache,
100 MHz FSB,”

600-mhz-512k-cache-100-mhz-fsb.html, 1999.

[40] Intel Corp.,
“Intel Pentium 4 Processor 570J Supporting HT Technology,”

//ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/27475/intel-pentium-4-processor-
570j-supporting-ht-technology-1m-cache-3-80-ghz-800-mhz-fsb.html, 2004.

[41] Intel Corp., “Intel Core 2 Duo Processor E6700,”
en/ark/products/27251/intel-core-2-duo-processor-e6700-4m-cache-2-66-ghz-1066-mhz-
fsb.html, 2006.

[42] JEDEC Solid State Technology Assn., JESD235C: High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) DRAM, Jan.
2020.

[43] JEDEC Solid State Technology Assn., JESD79-5C: DDR5 SDRAM Standard, Apr. 2024.

[44] T. F. Joyce, R. P. Kelly, J.-K. Shen, and M. M. Raguin, “Multiprocessors on a Single Semicon-
ductor Chip,” U.S. Patent 4 942 547, Dec. 7, 1987.

[45] C. Kim, D. Burger, and S. W. Keckler, “An Adaptive, Non-Uniform Cache Structure for Wire-
Delay Dominated On-Chip Caches,” in ASPLOS, 2002.

[46] S. Kim, D. Chandra, and Y. Solihin, “Fair Cache Sharing and Partitioning in a Chip Multi-
processor Architecture,” in PACT, 2004.

[47] W. Kim, M. S. Gupta, G.-Y. Wei, and D. Brooks, “System Level Analysis of Fast, Per-Core
DVFS Using On-Chip Switching Regulators,” in HPCA, 2008.

[48] D. Kroft, “Lockup-Free Instruction Fetch/Prefetch Cache Organization,” in ISCA, 1981.

[49] R. Kumar, K. I. Farkas, N. P. Jouppi, P. Ranganathan, and D. M. Tullsen, “Single-ISA Hetero-
geneous Multi-Core Architectures: The Potential for Processor Power Reduction,” in MICRO,
2003.

[50] L. Lamport, “How to Make a Multiprocessor Computer That Correctly Executes Multipro-
cess Progranm,” IEEE Trans. Comput., Sep. 1979.

[51] A. L. Leiner, “System Specifications for the DYSEAC,” U.S. Nat’l. Bureau of Standards, Tech.
Rep., 1952.

[52] O. Lempel, “2nd Generation Intel® Core™Processor Family: Intel® Core™i7, i5 and i3,” in
Hot Chips, 2011.

[53] Linux Kernel Organization, Inc., “Capacity Aware Scheduling,” in The Linux Kernel Docu-
mentation, 2023,

[54] Linux Kernel Organization, Inc., “Energy Aware Scheduling,” in The Linux Kernel Documen-
tation, 2023,

[55] W. Longergan and P. King, “Design of the B 5000 System,” Datamation, May 1961.

[56] K. Luo, J. Gummaraju, and M. Franklin, “Balancing Thoughput and Fairness in SMT Proces-
sors,” in ISPASS, 2001.

[57] P. Macken, M. Degrauwe, M. Van Paemel, and H. Oguey, “A Voltage Reduction Technique
for Digital Systems,” in ISSCC, 1990.

[58] P. Mannion, “Under the Hood: Inside the Apple iPhone,” EE Times, Jul. 2007.

[59] T. G. Mattson, B. A. Sanders, and B. L. Massingill, Patterns for Parallel Programming.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004.

[60] L. F. Menabrea, “Notions sur la machine analytique de M. Charles Babbage,” Biblioth`eque
universelle de Gen`eve, 1842.

[61] Minneapolis–Honeywell DATAmatic Division, Honeywell 800 Programmers’ Reference Man-
ual, 1960.

[62] G. E. Moore, “Cramming More Components Onto Integrated Circuits,” Electronics, Apr. 1965.

[63] G. E. Moore, “Progress in Digital Integrated Electronics,” in IEDM, 1975.

[64] O. Mutlu and T. Moscibroda, “Stall-Time Fair Memory Access Scheduling for Chip Multi-
processors,” in MICRO, 2006.

[65] S. Naffziger, N. Beck, T. Burd, K. Lepak, G. H. Loh, M. Subramony, and S. White, “Pioneering
Chiplet Technology and Design for the AMD EPYC™and Ryzen™Processor Families,” in
ISCA, 2021.

[66] V. Nagarajan, D. J. Sorin, M. D. Hill, and D. A. Wood, A Primer on Memory Consistency and
Cache Coherence, 2nd ed.
Springer Cham, 2020.

[67] National Semiconductor Corp., COP2440/COP2441/COP2442 and COP2340/COP2341/COP2342
Single-Chip Dual CPU Microcontrollers, 1982, datasheet, in COPS Microcontrollers Databook.

[68] K. Olukotun, B. A. Nayfeh, L. Hammond, K. Wilson, and K. Chang, “The Case for a Single-
Chip Multiprocessor,” in ASPLOS, 1996.

[69] M. S. Papamarcos and J. H. Patel, “A Low-Overhead Coherence Solution for Multiprocessors
With Private Cache Memories,” in ISCA, 1984.

[70] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., “Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 Mobile Platform,” 2024, product brief.

[71] S. Rixner, W. J. Dally, U. J. Kapasi, P. Mattson, and J. D. Owens, “Memory Access Scheduling,”
in ISCA, 2000.

[72] L. Rodgers, D. Clark, S. Joiner, B. Haslett, I. de la Torre Arenas, and S. Learner, “Inside the
Miracle of Modern Chip Manufacturing,” Financial Times, Feb. 2024.

[73] R. Rojas, “Konrad Zuse’s Legacy: The Architecture of the Z1 and Z3,” IEEE Ann. Hist. Comput.,
Apr.–Jun. 1996.

[74] R. Ronen, A. Mendelson, K. K. Lai, S.-L. Lu, F. J. Pollack, and J. P. Shen, “Coming Challenges
in Microarchitecture and Architecture,” Proc. IEEE, Mar. 2001.

[75] E. Rotem, Y. Mandelblat, V. Basin, E. Weissmann, A. Gihon, R. Chabukswar, R. Fenger, and
M. Gupta, “Alder Lake Architecture,” in Hot Chips, 2021.

[76] U. Schmidt and K. Caesar, “Datawave: A Single-Chip Multiprocessor for Video Applications,”
IEEE Micro, Jun. 1991.

[77] A. J. Smith, “Cache Memories,” ACM Comput. Surv., Sep. 1982.

[78] M. S. Smith, “Single-Chip Processors Have Reached Their Limits,” IEEE Spectrum, Apr. 2022.

[79] A. Snavely and D. M. Tullsen, “Symbiotic Jobscheduling for a Simultaneous Multithreaded
Processor,” in ASPLOS, 2000.

[80] G. S. Sohi, S. E. Breach, and T. Vijaykumar, “Multiscalar Processors,” in ISCA, 1995.

[81] G. S. Sohi and M. Franklin, “High-Bandwidth Data Memory Systems for Superscalar Pro-
cessors,” in ASPLOS, 1991.

[82] SPARC International Inc., The SPARC Architecture Manual, Version 8, 1991.

[83] A. H. Taub, D. B. Gillies, R. E. Meagher, D. E. Muller, R. W. McKay, J. P. Nash, W. J. Poppel-
baum, and J. E. Robertson, “On the Design of a Very High-Speed Computer,” Univ. of Illinois
Digital Computer Laboratory, Tech. Rep. 80, 1957.

[84] J. M. Tendler, J. S. Dodson, J. S. Fields Jr., H. Le, and B. Sinharoy, “POWER4 System Microar-
chitecture,” IBM J. Res. Dev., Jan. 2002.

[85] J. E. Thornton, “Parallel Operation in the Control Data 6600,” in FJCC, 1964.

[86] J. Torrellas, M. S. Lam, and J. L. Hennessy, “Shared Data Placement Optimizations to Reduce
Multiprocessor Cache Miss Rates,” in ICPP, 1990.

[87] E. Waingold, M. Taylor, D. Srikrishna, V. Sarkar, W. Lee, V. Lee, J. Kim, M. Frank, P. Finch,
R. Barua, J. Babb, S. Amarasinghe, and A. Agarwal, “Baring It All to Software: Raw Ma-
chines,” Computer, Sep. 1997.

[88] D. C. Whitney and C. H. White Jr., “Time-Sharing Services,” Modern Data Systems, Feb. 1968.

[89] B. I. Witt, “The Functional Structure of OS/360, Part II: Job and Task Management,” IBM Syst.
J., 1966.

[90] R. J. Wysocki, “CPU Performance Scaling,” in The Linux Kernel Documentation, 2020,
//docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/pm/cpufreq.html.

[91] K. Zuse, “Rechenmaschine zur Durchfuehrung von arithmetischen Rechenoperationen,”
German Patent 975 966, Jun. 30, 1949.