Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization

Allen Z. Ren1, Justin Lidard1, Lars L. Ankile2, Anthony Simeonov2,

Pulkit Agrawal2, Anirudha Majumdar1, Benjamin Burchfiel3, Hongkai Dai3, Max Simchowitz2,4

1Princeton University 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3Toyota Research Institute 4Carnegie Mellon University

arXiv:2409.00588v3 [cs.RO] 9 Dec 2024

Abstract

We introduce Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization, DPPO, an algorithmic framework including best
practices for fine-tuning diffusion-based policies (e.g. Diffusion Policy [20]) in continuous control and
robot learning tasks using the policy gradient (PG) method from reinforcement learning (RL). PG meth-
ods are ubiquitous in training RL policies with other policy parameterizations; nevertheless, they had
been conjectured to be less efficient for diffusion-based policies. Surprisingly, we show that DPPO
achieves the strongest overall performance and efficiency for fine-tuning in common benchmarks com-
pared to other RL methods for diffusion-based policies and also compared to PG fine-tuning of other
policy parameterizations.
Through experimental investigation, we find that DPPO takes advantage
of unique synergies between RL fine-tuning and the diffusion parameterization, leading to structured
and on-manifold exploration, stable training, and strong policy robustness. We further demonstrate the
strengths of DPPO in a range of realistic settings, including simulated robotic tasks with pixel observa-
tions, and via zero-shot deployment of simulation-trained policies on robot hardware in a long-horizon,
multi-stage manipulation task. Website with code: diffusion-ppo.github.io.

1
Introduction

Large-scale pre-training with additional fine-tuning has become a ubiquitous pipeline in the development
of language and image foundation models [12, 65, 75, 82]. Though behavior cloning with expert data
[71] is rapidly emerging as dominant paradigm for pre-training robot policies [27, 28, 30, 50, 106], their
performance can be suboptimal [64] due to expert data being suboptimal or expert data exhibiting limited
coverage of possible environment conditions. As robot policies entail interaction with their environment,
reinforcement learning (RL) [90] is a natural candidate for further optimizing their performance beyond the
limits of demonstration data. However, RL fine-tuning can be nuanced for pre-trained policies parameterized
as diffusion models [38], which have emerged as a leading parameterization for action policies [20, 66, 78],
due in large part to their high training stability and ability to represent complex distributions [39, 49, 72, 80].

Contribution 1 (DPPO). We introduce Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization (DPPO), a generic
framework as well as a set of carefully chosen design decisions for fine-tuning a diffusion-based
robot learning policy via popular policy gradient methods [85, 91] in reinforcement learning.

The literature has already studied improving/fine-tuning diffusion-based policies (Diffusion Policy) us-
ing RL [35, 74, 100], and has applied policy gradient (PG) to fine-tuning non-interactive applications of
diffusion models such as text-to-image generation [9, 21, 25]. Yet PG methods have been believed to be
inefficient in training Diffusion Policy for continuous control tasks [74, 103]. On the contrary, we show
that for a Diffusion Policy pre-trained from expert demonstrations, our methodology for fine-tuning via PG
updates yields robust, high-performing policies with favorable training behavior.

DPPO: Diǒusion Policy Policy Optimization

Environment MDP

Policy
Gradient

Diffusion

Diffusion

MDP

MDP

Update

Structured exploration
Training stability
Policy robustness

Figure 1: We introduce DPPO, Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization, that fine-tunes pre-trained Diffusion
Policy using policy gradient. DPPO treats the denoising process as a Markov Decision Process (“Diffusion
MDP”) allowing the task reward signal (from “Environment MDP“) to easily propagate through Diffusion
Policy (Fig. 3). Policy gradient update then leverages the tractable Gaussian likelihood at each denoising
step. Extensive experiments in simulation and hardware show DPPO affords structured exploration and
training stability during policy fine-tuning, and the final policy exhibits strong robustness and generalization.

Contribution 2 (Demonstration of DPPO’s Performance). We show that for fine-tuning a
pre-trained Diffusion Policy, DPPO yields strong training stability across tasks and marked
improvements in final performance in challenging robotic tasks in comparison to a range of
alternatives, including those based on off-policy Q-learning [35, 74, 100, 103] and weighted
regression [47, 67, 70], other demo-augmented RL methods [7, 40, 62], as well as common
policy parameterizations such as Gaussian and Gaussian Mixture models with PG updates.

The above finding might be surprising because PG methods do not appear to take advantage of the unique
capabilities of diffusion sampling (e.g., guidance [2, 45]). Through careful investigative experimentation,
however, we find a unique synergy between RL fine-tuning and diffusion-based policies.

Contribution 3 (Understanding the mechanism of DPPO’s success). We complement our re-
sults with numerous investigative experiments that provide insight into the mechanisms behind
DPPO’s strong performance. Compared to other common policy parameterizations, we pro-
vide evidence that DPPO engages in structured exploration that takes better advantage of the
“manifold” of training data, and finds policies that exhibit greater robustness to perturbation.

Through ablations, we further show that our design decisions overcome the speculated limitation of PG
methods for fine-tuning Diffusion Policy. Finally, to justify the broad utility of DPPO, we verify its efficacy
across both simulated and real environments, and in situations when either ground-truth states or pixels are
given to the policy as input.

Contribution 4 (Tackling challenging robotic tasks and settings). We show DPPO is effective
in various challenging robotic and control settings, including ones with pixel observations and
long-horizon manipulation tasks with sparse reward. We also deploy a policy trained in simu-
lation via DPPO on real hardware in zero-shot, which exhibits a remarkably small sim-to-real
gap compared to the baseline.

Robust sim-to-real transfer in zero shot

Corrective

behavior

Figure 2: DPPO solves challenging long-horizon manipulation tasks from FURNITURE-BENCH ([36]), and
allows robust sim-to-real transfer without using any real data (see Section 5.4).

1.1
Overview of Approach

Like prior work [9, 21], our approach unrolls the denoising diffusion process into an MDP in which action
likelihoods are explicit; from this, we construct a two-layer MDP whose outer layer corresponds to the
environment MDP and inner layer to the denoising MDP. Given the challenges of RL training, we also
present a number of design decisions tailored to DPPO that are crucial for enabling DPPO’s performance in
challenging robotic settings, discussed in Contributions 2 and 4, including:

• We apply Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [85] to the two-layer MDP. We show how to efficiently
estimate the advantage function for the PPO update.

• We show that for fine-tuning tasks, it often suffices to fine-tune only the last few steps of the denoising
process, or fine-tune the Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) [87] instead.

• We propose modifications to the diffusion noise schedule to ensure stable training and adequate ex-
ploration, whilst also leveraging the natural stochasticity of diffusion models.

Our method is formally detailed in Section 4. As noted above, we conduct extensive experiments demon-
strating both the success of DPPO in Section 5 and potential explanations thereof in Section 6.

2
Related Work

Policy optimization and its application to robotics.
Policy optimization methods update an explicit rep-
resentation of an RL policy — typically parameterized by a neural network — by taking gradients through
action likelihoods. Following the seminal policy gradient (PG) method [91, 101], there have been a range
of algorithms that further improve training stability and sample efficiency such as DDPG [54] and PPO
[84]. PG methods have been broadly effective in training robot policies [4, 17, 43, 48], largely due to their
training stability with high-dimensional continuous action spaces, as well as their favorable scaling with par-
allelized simulated environments. Given the challenges of from-scratch exploration in long-horizon tasks,
PG has seen great success in fine-tuning a baseline policy trained from demonstrations [68, 76, 93]. Our
experiments find DPPO performing on-policy PG often achieves stronger final performance in manipula-
tion tasks, especially ones with long horizon and high-dimensional action space, than off-policy Q-learning
methods [7, 40, 62]. See Appendix A.1 for extended discussions on PG fine-tuning of robot policies and
related methods.

Learning and improving diffusion-based policies.
Diffusion-based policies [5, 20, 66, 78, 89, 99, 105]
have shown recent success in robotics and decision making applications. Most typically, these policies are
trained from human demonstrations through a supervised objective, and enjoy both high training stability
and strong performance in modeling complex and multi-modal trajectory distributions.

As demonstration data are often limited and/or suboptimal, there have been many approaches proposed
to improve the performance of diffusion-based policies. One popular approach has been to guide the dif-
fusion denoising process using objectives such as reward signal or goal conditioning [2, 15, 45, 53, 96].
More recent work has explored the possibilities of techniques including Q-learning and weighted regres-
sion, either from purely offline estimation [16, 22, 100], and/or with online interaction [35, 47, 74, 103].
See Appendix A.2 for detailed descriptions of these methods.

Policy gradient through diffusion models.
RL techniques have been used to fine-tune diffusion models
such as ones for text-to-image generation [9, 24, 25, 97]. Black et al. [9] treat the denoising process as
an MDP and apply PPO updates. We build upon these earlier findings by embedding the denoising MDP
into the environmental MDP of the dynamics in control tasks, forming a two-layer “Diffusion Policy MDP”.
Though Psenka et al. [74] have already shown how PG can be taken through Diffusion Policy by propagating
PG through both MDPs, they conjecture that it is likely to be ineffective due to large action variance caused
by the increased effective horizon induced from the denoising steps. Our results contravene this supposition
for diffusion-based policies in the fine-tuning setting.

3
Preliminaries

Markov Decision Process.
We consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP)1 MENV := (S, A, P0, P, R)
with states s ∈S, actions a ∈A, initial state distribution P0, transition probabilities P, and reward R.
At each timestep t, the agent (e.g., robot) observes the state st ∈S, takes an action at ∼π(at | st) ∈A,
transitions to the next state st+1 according to st+1 ∼P(st+1 | st, at) while receiving the reward R(st, at)2.
Fixing the MDP MENV, we let Eπ (resp. Pπ) denote the expectation (resp. probability distribution) over
trajectories (s0, a0, ..., sT , aT ) with length T + 1, with initial state distribution s0 ∼P0 and transition
operator P. We aim to train a policy to optimize the cumulative reward, discounted by a function γ(·): :





X

J (πθ) = Eπθ,P0

t≥0
γ(t)R(st, at)

.
(3.1)

Policy optimization.
The policy gradient method (e.g., REINFORCE [101]) allows for improving policy
performance by approximating the gradient of this objective w.r.t. the policy parameters:





X

,
rt(st, at) :=
X

∇θJ (πθ) = Eπθ,P0

t≥0
∇θ log πθ(at|st)rt(st, at)

τ≥t
γ(τ)R(sτ, aτ),
(3.2)

where rt is the discounted cumulative future reward from time t (more generally, rt can be replaced by
a Q-function estimator [91]), γ is the discount factor that depends on the time-step, and ∇θ log πθ(at|st)
denotes the gradient of the logarithm of the likelihood of at | st. To reduce the variance of the gradient
estimation, a state-value function ˆV πθ(st) can be learned to approximate E[rt]. The estimated advantage
function ˆAπθ(st, at) := rt(st, at) −ˆV πθ(st) substitutes rt(st, at).

1More generally, we can view our environment as a Partially Observed Markov Decision Process (POMDP) where the agent’s
actions depend on observations o of the states s (e.g., action from pixels). Our implementation applies in this setting, but we omit
additional observations from the formalism to avoid notional clutter.
2For simplicity, we overload R(·, ·) to denote both the random variable reward and its distribution.

Diffusion models.
A denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [38, 63, 86] represents a continuous-
valued data distribution p(·) = p(x0) as the reverse denoising process of a forward noising process q(xk|xk−1)
that iteratively adds Gaussian noise to the data. The reverse process is parameterized by a neural network
εθ(xk, k), predicting the added noise ε that converts x0 to xk [38]. Sampling starts with a random sample
xK ∼N(0, I) and iteratively generates the denoised sample:

xk−1 ∼pθ(xk−1|xk) := N(xk−1; µk(xk, εθ(xk, k)), σ2
kI).
(3.3)

Above, µk(·) is a fixed function, independent of θ, that maps xk and predicted εθ to the next mean, and σ2
k
is a variance term that abides by a fixed schedule from k = 1, . . . , K. We refer the reader to Chan [14] for
an in-depth survey.

Diffusion models as policies.
Diffusion Policy (DP; see Chi et al. [20]) is a policy πθ parameterized by
a DDPM which takes in s as a conditioning argument, and parameterizes pθ(ak−1 | ak, s) as in Eq. (3.3).
DPs can be trained via behavior cloning by fitting the conditional noise prediction εθ(ak, s, k) to predict the
added noise. Notice that unlike more standard policy parameterizations such as unimodal Gaussian policies,
DPs do not maintain an explicit likelihood of pθ(a0 | s). In this work, we adopt the common practice of
training DPs to predict an action chunk — a sequence of actions a few time steps (denoted Tp) into the
future — to promote temporal consistency. Policy executes Ta ≤Tp steps of the predicted chunk before the
next prediction. From now on a ∈A denotes the entire executed action chunk. For fair comparison, our
diffusion and non-diffusion baselines use the same Ta unless noted.

4
DPPO: Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization

As noted in Section 1 and Section 2, there has been much attention devoted to fine-tuning Diffusion Policy
for improved performance [74, 103], focusing primarily on off-policy Q-learning [35, 100] and/or weighted
regression. DPPO takes a different approach: differentiate through action likelihood and apply a policy
gradient (PG) update like Eq. (3.2).

4.1
A Two-Layer “Diffusion Policy MDP”

Figure 3: We treat the denoising process in Diffusion Policy as an MDP, and the whole environment episode
can be considered as a chain of such MDPs. Now the entire chain (“Diffusion Policy MDP”, MDP) involves
a Gaussian likelihood at each (denoising) step and thus can be optimized with policy gradient. Blue circle
denotes the state and red circle denotes the action in MDP.

As observed in [9] and [74], a denoising process can be represented as a multi-step MDP in which
policy likelihood of each denoising step can be obtained directly. We extend this formalism by embedding
the Diffusion MDP into the environmental MDP, obtaining a larger “Diffusion Policy MDP” denoted MDP,

visualized in Fig. 3. Below, we use the notation δ to denote a Dirac distribution and ⊗to denote a product
distribution.
Recall the environment MDP MENV := (S, A, P0, P, R) in Section 3. The Diffusion MDP MDP uses
indices ¯t(t, k) = tK + (K −k −1) corresponding to (t, k), which increases in t but (to keep the indexing
conventions of diffusion) decreases lexicographically with K −1 ≥k ≥0. The states, actions and rewards
are

(
0
k > 0
R(st, a0
t )
k = 0 ,

¯s¯t(t,k) = (st, ak+1
t
),
¯a¯t(t,k) = ak
t ,
¯R¯t(t,k)(¯s¯t(t,k), ¯a¯t(t,k)) =

where the bar-action at ¯t(t, k) is the action ak
t after one denoising step. Reward is only given at times
corresponding to when a0
t is taken. The initial state distribution is ¯P 0 = P0 ⊗N(0, I), corresponding to
s0 ∼P0 is the initial distribution from the environmental MDP and aK
0 ∼N(0, I) independently. Finally,
the transitions are

(
(st, ak
t ) ∼δ(st,ak
t )
¯t = ¯t(t, k), k > 0

¯P(¯s¯t+1 | ¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) =

(st+1, aK
t+1) ∼P(st+1 | st, a0
t ) ⊗N(0, I)
¯t = ¯t(t, k), k = 0
.

That is, the transition moves the denoised action ak
t at step ¯t(t, k) into the next state when k > 0, or
otherwise progresses the environment MDP dynamics with k = 0. The pure noise aK
t is considered part of
the environment when transitioning at k = 0. In light of Eq. (3.3), the policy in MDP takes the form

¯πθ(¯a¯t(t,k) | ¯s¯t(t,k)) = πθ(ak
t | ak+1
t
, st) = N(ak
t ; µ(ak+1
t
, εθ(ak+1
t
, k + 1, st)), σ2
k+1I).
(4.1)

Fortunately, Eq. (4.1) is a Gaussian likelihood, which can be evaluated analytically and is amenable to the
policy gradient updates3:

∇θ ¯
J (¯πθ) = E¯πθ, ¯P, ¯P 0




τ≥¯t
γ(τ) ¯R(¯sτ, ¯aτ).
(4.2)

,
¯r(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) :=
X

X

¯t≥0
∇θ log ¯πθ(¯a¯t | ¯s¯t)¯r(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t)

Evaluating the above involves sampling through the denoising process, which is the usual “forward pass”
that samples actions in Diffusion Policy; as noted above, the inital state can be sampled from the enviroment
via ¯P 0 = P0 ⊗N(0, I), where P0 is from the environment MDP.

4.2
Instantiating DPPO with Proximal Policy Optimization

We apply Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [1, 23, 41, 85], a popular improvement of the vanilla policy
gradient update. The full pseudocode with implementation details are shown in Algorithm 1, Appendix B.

Definition 4.1 (Generalized PPO, clipping variant). Consider a general MDP. Given an advantage estimator
ˆA(s, a), the PPO update [85] is the sample approximation to

πθold(at | st), ˆAπθold(st, at) clip
πθ(at | st)

∇θ E(st,at)∼πθold min

ˆAπθold(st, at) πθ(at | st)

πθold(at | st), 1 −ε, 1 + ε

,

where ε, the clipping ratio, controls the maximum magnitude of the policy updated from the previous policy.

3[74] proposes a similar derivation but does not consider the denoising process as a MDP. See further clarification in Appendix A.

We instantiate PPO in our diffusion MDP with (s, a, t) ←(¯s, ¯a, ¯t). Our advantage estimator takes a
specific form that respects the two-level nature of the MDP: let γENV ∈(0, 1) be the environment discount
and γDENOISE ∈(0, 1) be the denoising discount. Consider the environment-discounted return:

¯r(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) :=
X

t′≥t
γt
ENV¯r(¯s¯t(t′,0), ¯a¯t(t′,0)),
¯t = ¯t(t, k),

since ¯R(¯t) = 0 at k > 0. This fact also obviates the need of estimating the value at k > 1 and allows us to
use the following denoising-discounted advantage estimator4:
ˆAπθold(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) := γk
DENOISE

¯r(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) −ˆV ¯πθold(¯s¯t(t,0))


The denoising-discounting has the effect of downweighting the contribution of noisier steps (larger k) to the
policy gradient (see study in Appendix C.2). Lastly, we choose the value estimator to only depend on the
“s” component of ¯s:
ˆV ¯πθold(¯s¯t(t,0)) := ˜V ¯πθold(st),

which we find leads to more efficient and stable training compared to also estimating the value of applying
the denoised action ak=1
t
(part of ¯s¯t(t,0)) as shown in Appendix C.2.

4.3
Best Practices for DPPO

Fine-tune only the last few denoising steps.
Diffusion Policy often uses up to K = 100 denoising steps
with DDPM to better capture the complex data distribution of expert demonstrations. With DPPO, we can
choose to fine-tune only a subset of the denoising steps instead, e.g., the last K′ steps. Experimental results
in Appendix C.2 shows this speeds up DPPO training and reduces GPU memory usage without sacrificing
the final performance. Instead of fine-tuning the pre-trained model weights θ, we make a copy θFT — θ is
frozen and used for the early denoising steps, while θFT is used for the last K′ steps and updated with DPPO.

Fine-tune DDIM sampling.
Instead of fine-tuning all K or the last few steps of the DDPM, one can
also apply Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) [87] during fine-tuning, which greatly reduces the
number of sampling steps KDDIM ≪K, e.g., as few as 5 steps, and thus potentially improves DPPO
efficiency as fewer steps are fine-tuned:

xk−1 ∼pDDIM
θ
(xk−1|xk) := N(xk−1; µDDIM(xk, εθ(xk, k)), ησ2
kI),
k = KDDIM, ..., 0.
(4.3)

Although DDIM is typically used as a deterministic sampler by setting η = 0 in Eq. (4.3), we can use
η > 0 for fine-tuning in order to provide exploration noise and avoid calculating a Gaussian likelihood with
a Dirac distribution. In practice, we set η = 1 for training (equivalent to applying DDPM [87]) and then
η = 0 for evaluation. We use DDIM sampling for our pixel-based experiments and long-horizon furniture
assembly tasks, where the efficiency improvements are much desired.

Diffusion noise scheduling.
We use the cosine schedule for σk introduced in [63], which was originally
annealed to a small value on the order of 1e−4 at k = 0. In DPPO, the values of σk also translate to
the exploration noise that is crucial to training efficiency. Empirically, we find that clipping σk to a higher
minimum value (denoted σexp
min, e.g., 0.01 −0.1) when sampling actions helps exploration (see study in
Appendix C.2). Additionally we clip σk to be at least 0.1 (denoted σprob
min ) when evaluating the Gaussian
likelihood log ¯πθ(¯a¯t|¯s¯t), which improves training stability by avoiding large magnitude.

4In practice, we use Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE, Schulman et al. [84]) that better balances variance and bias in
estimating the advantage. We present the simpler form here.

Network architecture.
We study both Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) and UNet [81] as the policy heads
in Diffusion Policy. MLP offers a simpler setup, and we find that it generally fine-tunes more stably with
DPPO. Meanwhile, UNet, only applying convolutions to ak
t , has the benefit of allowing fine-tuning with
Ta < Tp, e.g., Tp = 16 and Ta = 8. We find that DPPO benefits from pre-training with larger Tp (better
prediction) and fine-tuning with smaller Ta (more amenable to policy gradient)5.

5
Performance Evaluation of DPPO

We study the performance of DPPO in popular RL and robotics benchmarking environments. We compare
to other RL methods for fine-tuning a Diffusion Policy (Section 5.1), to other demo-augmented RL meth-
ods (Section 5.2), to other policy parameterizations with PG updates (Section 5.3), and then in multi-stage
manipulation tasks including hardware evaluation (Section 5.4), and conclude with ablations (Section 5.5).
While our evaluations focus primarily on fine-tuning, we also present training-from-scratch results in Ap-
pendix C. Wall-clock times are reported and discussed in Appendix D; they are roughly comparable (of-
ten faster) than other diffusion-based RL baselines, much faster than other demo-augmented RL baselines,
though can be up to 2× slower than other policy parameterizations. Full choices of training hyperparameters
and additional training details are presented in Appendix E.

Environments: OpenAI Gym.
We first consider three OpenAI GYM locomotion benchmarks [11] com-
mon in the RL literature: {Hopper-v2, Walker2D-v2, HalfCheetah-v2}. All policies are pre-
trained with the full medium-level datasets from D4RL [29] with state input and action chunk size Ta = 4.
We use the original dense reward setup in fine-tuning.

Environments: Franka Kitchen.
We also consider the FRANKA-KITCHEN environment first introduced
in [32] involving a Franka arm completing four countertop tasks. We use the three datasets from D4RL [29]:
{Kitchen-Complete-v0, Kitchen-Partial-v0, Kitchen-Mixed-v0}, containing demonstra-
tions of varying levels of completeness. State input is considered and action chunk size Ta = 4 is used for
DPPO. We use the original sparse reward setup in fine-tuning.

Environments: Robomimic.
Next we consider four simulated robot manipulation tasks from the ROBOMIMIC
benchmark [60], {Lift, Can, Square, Transport}, ordered in increasing difficulty. These tasks are
more representative of real-world robotic tasks, and Square and Transport (Fig. 4) are considered
very challenging for RL training. Both state and pixel policy input are considered. State-based and pixel-
based policies are pre-trained with 300 and 100 demonstrations provided by ROBOMIMIC, respectively.
We mostly consider the noisier Multi-Human (MH) data from ROBOMIMIC but also consider the cleaner
Proficient-Human (PH) data in some experiments. We consider Ta = 4 for Can, Lift, and Square, and
Ta = 8 for Transport. They are then fine-tuned with sparse reward equal to 1 upon task completion.

Environments: Furniture-Bench & real furniture assembly.
Finally, we demonstrate solving longer-
horizon, multi-stage robot manipulation tasks from the FURNITURE-BENCH [36] benchmark. We consider
three simulated furniture assembly tasks, {One-leg, Lamp, Round-table}, shown in Fig. 4 and de-
scribed in detail in Appendix E.8. We consider two levels of randomness over initial state distribution, Low
and Med, defined by the benchmark. All policies are pre-trained with 50 human demonstrations collected in
simulation and Ta = 8. They are then fine-tuned with sparse (indicator of task stage completion) reward.
We also evaluate the zero-shot sim-to-real performance with One-leg.

5With fully-connected layers in MLP, empirically we find that fine-tuning with Ta < Tp leads to training instability.

Transport
One-leg
Round-table
Lamp

Figure 4: Long-horizon robot manipulations tasks including (left) the bimanual Transport from
ROBOMIMIC and (right) FURNITURE-BENCH tasks (full rollouts visualized in Fig. A12).

5.1
Comparison to diffusion-based RL algorithms

We compare DPPO to an extensive list of RL methods for fine-tuning diffusion-based policies. Baseline
names are color-coordinated with their plot colors. Two methods, DRWR, DAWR, are our own, novel base-
lines that are based on reward-weighted regression (RWR, Peters and Schaal [70]) and advantage-weighted
regression (AWR, Peng et al. [67]). The remaining methods, DIPO [103], IDQL [35], DQL [100], and
QSM [74], are existing in the literature. Among them, QSM and DIPO are proposed specifically for training-
from-scratch, while IDQL and DQL can be more suitable to online fine-tuning. We evaluate on the three
OpenAI GYM tasks and the four ROBOMIMIC tasks with state input; detailed descriptions of all baselines
and training details are in Appendix E.3.
Overall, DPPO performs consistently, exhibits great training stability, and enjoys strong fine-tuning
performance across tasks. In the GYM tasks (Figure 5, top row), IDQL and DIPO exhibit competitive
performance, while the other methods often perform worse and train less stably. Baselines also tend to
exhibit performance drop at the beginning of fine-tuning, mostly likely due to misestimating Q values of
the pre-trained policy. DPPO is the strongest performer in the ROBOMIMIC tasks (Figure 5, bottom row),
especially in the challenging Transport tasks. IDQL and, surprisingly, DRWR, are strong baselines
in {Lift, Can, Square} but underperforms in Transport, while all other baselines fare worse still.
We postulate that the other baselines, all performing off-policy updates and propagating gradients from the
imperfect Q function to the actor, suffers from even greater training instability in sparse-reward ROBOMIMIC
tasks given the continuous action space plus large action chunk sizes (see furtuer studies in Appendix C.2).

Figure 5: Comparing to other diffusion-based RL algorithms. Top row: GYM tasks [11] averaged over
five seeds. Bottow row: ROBOMIMIC tasks [60], averaged over three seeds, with state observation. DPPO
curves are slightly thicker for better visibility.

5.2
Comparison to other demo-augmented RL algorithms

We compare DPPO with recently proposed RL methods for training robot policies (not necessarily diffusion-
based) leveraging offline data, including RLPD [7], Cal-QL [62], and IBRL [40]. These methods add
expert data in the replay buffer and performs off-policy updates (IBRL and Cal-QL also pretrain with
behavior cloning and offline RL objectives, respectively), which significantly improves sample efficiency
vs. DPPO in HalfCheetah-v2 (Fig. 6, top left).
Among the FRANKA-KITCHEN settings (Fig. 6, top right), we find RLPD and IBRL fail to learn
well especially with noisier demonstrations from Kitchen-Partial-v0 and Kitchen-Mixed-v0.
Cal-QL achieves competitive performance but DPPO still achieves overall the best performance especially
with Kitchen-Complete-v0. We note that DPPO, not using any expert data during fine-tuning, can be
sensitive to the pre-training performance; we find the incomplete demonstrations in Kitchen-Partial-v0
and Kitchen-Mixed-v0 cause challenge in fully modeling the multi-modality of the data even with dif-
fusion parameterization and prevent DPPO from achieving (near-)perfect fine-tuning performance.
Nonetheless, we believe the expert demonstrations from ROBOMIMIC are most reflective of pre-training
plus fine-tuning in robotics as all demonstrations complete the task despite the varying quality. Fig. 6
bottom row shows the performance of DPPO and baselines using either cleaner PH or noisier MH data in
Can and Square; DPPO exhibits much stronger final performance. RLPD and Cal-QL fail to learn at
all and IBRL saturates at lower success levels. DPPO also runs significantly faster in wall-clock time than
the baselines as it leverages sampling from highly parallelized environments6; thus we cap the number of
samples at 1e6 for the baselines in ROBOMIMIC, also since their performance saturates.

Figure 6: Comparing to other demo-augmented RL algorithms. Top left: HalfCheetah-v2 task [11]
averaged over five seeds. Top right: FRANKA-KITCHEN task [32] averaged over three seeds. Bottom row:
ROBOMIMIC tasks [60] averaged over three seeds with state observation, using either Proficient-Human
(PH) or Multi-Human (MH) data.

6Off-policy methods (baselines) usually cannot fully leverage parallelized sampling as the policy is updated less often (e.g., 50
updates per 50 samples instead of 1 update per 1 sample) and the performance can be affected.

5.3
Comparison to other policy parameterizations

We compare DPPO with popular RL policy parameterizations: unimodal Gaussian with diagonal covariance
[91] and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM [8]), using either MLPs or Transformers [94], and also fine-tuned
with the PPO objective. We compare these to DPPO-MLP and DPPO-UNet, which use either MLP or
UNet as the network backbone. We evaluate on the four tasks from ROBOMIMIC (Lift, Can, Square,
Transport) with both state and pixel input. With state input, DPPO pre-trains with 20 denoising steps
and then fine-tunes the last 10. With pixel input, DPPO pre-trains with 100 denoising steps and then fine-
tunes 5 DDIM steps.

Figure 7:
Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the more challenging Square and
Transport tasks from ROBOMIMIC, with state (left) or pixel (right) observation. Results are averaged
over three seeds.

Fig. 7 display results for the more challenging Square and Transport — we defer the results in
Lift and Can to Fig. A9. With state input, DPPO outperforms Gaussian and GMM policies, with faster
convergence to ∼100% success rate in Lift and Can, and greater final performance on Square and
the challenging Transport, where it reaches > 90%. UNet and MLP variants perform similarly, with
the latter training somewhat more rapidly. With pixel inputs, we use a Vision-Transformer-based (ViT)
image encoder introduced in Hu et al. [40] and an MLP head and compare the resulting variants DPPO-
ViT-MLP and Gaussian-ViT-MLP (we omit GMM due to poor performance in state-based training). While
the two are comparable on Lift and Can, DPPO trains more quickly and to higher accuracy on Square,
and drastically outperforms on Transport, whereas Gaussian does not improve from its 0% pre-trained
success rate. To our knowledge, DPPO is the first RL algorithm to solve Transport from either state
or pixel input to high (>50%) success rates.

5.4
Evaluation on Furniture-Bench, and sim-to-real transfer

Here we evaluate DPPO on the long-horizon manipulation tasks from FURNITURE-BENCH [36]. We com-
pare DPPO to Gaussian-MLP, the overall most effective baseline from Section 5.3. Fig. 8 (top row) shows
the evaluation success rate over fine-tuning iterations. DPPO exhibits strong training stability and improves
policy performance in all six settings. Gaussian-MLP collapses to zero success rate in all three tasks with
Med randomness (except for one seed in Lamp) and Round-table with Low randomness.
Note that we are only using 50 human demonstrations for pre-training; we expect DPPO can leverage
additional human data (better state space coverage) to further improve in Med, which is corroborated by
ablation studies in Appendix C.3 examining the effect of pre-training data on DPPO.

Sim-to-real transfer.
We evaluate DPPO and Gaussian policies trained in the simulated One-leg task on
physical hardware zero-shot (i.e., no real data fine-tuning / co-training) over 20 trials. Both policies run at
10Hz. Please see additional simulation training and hardware details in Appendix E.8. Fig. 8 (bottom row)
shows simulated and hardware success rates after pre-training and fine-tuning. Notably, DPPO improves the

Figure 8: (Top) DPPO vs. Gaussian-MLP baseline in simulated FURNITURE-BENCH tasks. Results are
averaged over three seeds. (Bottom) Sim-to-real transfer results in One-leg.

real-world performance to 80% (16 out of 20 trials). Though the Gaussian policy achieves a high success
rate in simulation after fine-tuning (88%), it fails entirely on hardware (0%). Supplemental video suggests
it exhibits volatile and jittery behavior. For stronger comparison, we also fine-tune the Gaussian policy with
an auxiliary behavior-cloning loss [93] such that the fine-tuned policy is encouraged to stay close to the base
policy. However, this limits fine-tuning and only leads to 53% success rate in simulation and 50% in reality.
Qualitatively, we find fine-tuned policies to be more robust and exhibit more corrective behaviors than
pre-trained-only policies, especially during the insertion stage of the task; such behaviors are visualized in
Fig. 2 and Fig. 9 shows representative rollouts on hardware. Overall, these results demonstrate the strong
sim-to-real capabilities of DPPO; Section 6 provides a conjectural mechanism for why this may be the case.

5.5
Summary of ablation findings

We conduct extensive ablation studies in Appendix C.2. Our main findings include: (1) for challenging tasks,
using a value estimator which depends on environment state but is independent of denoised action is crucial
for performance; we conjecture that this is related to the high stochasticity of Diffusion Policy; (2) there
is a sweet spot for clipping the denoising noise level for DPPO exploration, trading off between too little
exploration and too much action noise; (3) DPPO is resilient to fine-tuning fewer-than-K denoising steps,
yielding improved runtime and comparable performance; (4) DPPO yields improvements over Gaussian-
MLP baselines for varying levels of expert demonstration data, and achieves comparable final performance
and sample efficiency when training from scratch in GYM environments.

6
Understanding the performance of DPPO

The improvement of DPPO over popular Gaussian and GMM methods in Section 5.3 comes as a surprise
initially as DPPO solves a much longer Diffusion Policy MDP (Section 4) than the original environment
MDP that other methods solve. This leads us to study the factors contributing to DPPO’s improvements in
performance. Our findings highlight three major contributing factors:

(1) DPPO induces structured exploration near the pre-training data manifold [26].

(2) DPPO updates the action distribution progressively through the multi-step denoising process, which
can be flexible and robust to policy collapse.

DP Pre-trained

Initialization
Grasp tabletop
Place tabletop
Grasp leg
Insert leg
Screw leg
(A) Pre-trained Diffusion policy performs successful rollout

(B) Policy pushes peg down without proper alignment with the hole before releasing the peg, making it topple over

DP Fine-tuned

(C) Fine-tuned DPPO policy performs successful rollout

(D) Initial peg alignment is off, the policy corrects placement until it is properly inserted in the hole before letting go

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of pre-trained vs. fine-tuned DPPO policies in hardware evaluation.
(A) Successful rollout with the pre-trained policy. (B) Failed rollout with the pre-trained policy due to
imprecise insertion. (C) Successful rollout with the fine-tuned policy. (D) Successful rollout with the fine-
tuned policy exhibiting corrective behavior.

(3) DPPO leads to fine-tuned policies robust to perturbations in dynamics and initial state distribution.

We use the Avoid environment from D3IL benchmark [46], where a robot arm needs to reach the other
side of the table while avoiding an array of obstacles (Fig. 10, top-left). The action space is the 2D target
location of the end-effector.
D3IL provides a set of expert demonstrations that covers different possible
paths to the goal line — we consider three subsets of the demonstrations, M1, M2, and M3 in Fig. 10,
each with two distinct modes. We choose such relatively simple setups with only two modes in each setting
such that Gaussian (with exploration noise)7 and GMM can fit the expert data distribution reasonably well,
allowing fair comparisons in fine-tuning.
We pre-train MLP-based Diffusion, Gaussian, and GMM policies (action chunk size Ta = 4 unless
noted) with the demonstrations. For fine-tuning, we assign sparse reward when the robot reaches the goal
line from the topmost mode. Gaussian and GMM policies are also fine-tuned with the PPO objective.

Benefit 1: Structured, on-manifold exploration.
Fig. 10 (right) shows the sampled trajectories (with
exploration noise) from DPPO, Gaussian, and GMM during the first iteration of fine-tuning. DPPO explores
in wide coverage around the expert data manifold, whereas Gaussian generates less structured exploration

7Without noise, Gaussian policy is fully deterministic and cannot capture the two modes.

Figure 10: (Left) We use the Avoid environment from D3IL benchmark [46] to visualize the DPPO’s
exploration tendencies. We design the task of always reaching the green goal line from the topmost mode.
(Right) Structured exploration. We show sampled trajectories at the first iteration of fine-tuning for DPPO,
Gaussian, and GMM after pre-training on three sets of expert demonstrations, M1, M2, and M3.

noise (especially in M2) and GMM exhibits narrower coverage. Unlike Gaussian policy that adds noise only
to the final sampled action, diffusion adds multiple rounds of noise through denoising. Each denoising step
expands the coverage with new noise while also pushing the newly denoised action towards the expert
data manifold [69]. Moreover, the combination of diffusion parameterization with the denoising of action
chunks means that policy stochasticity in DPPO is structured in both action dimension and time horizon.
Quantitatively, Fig. A8 in Appendix shows DPPO achieves greater fine-tuning efficiency than Gaussian and
GMM in all settings if a sufficient number of denoising steps is fine-tuned, consistent with the findings in
Section 5.3 and Section 5.5.
It is possible, however, that the on-manifold exploration we observe with DPPO hinders fine-tuning
when aggressive, unstructured exploration is desired. We conjecture this is the case in the Lamp environment
with Low randomness, in which DPPO slightly underperforms the Gaussian baseline (Fig. 8). Moreover,
we do not observe that DPPO is substantially better (nor is it any worse) than Gaussian in exploration from-
scratch (see Appendix C). Thus, we anticipate that this structured, on-manifold exploration confers the
greatest benefit when pre-training provides sufficient coverage of relevant success modes. In particular, we
believe that this makes DPPO uniquely suited for fine-tuning large Diffusion Policy pre-trained on multiple
tasks [99], as it may exhibit sufficient mode coverage given training data diversity.

Benefit 2: Training stability from multi-step denoising process.
In Fig. 11 (left), we run fine-tuning
after pre-training with M2 and attempt to de-stabilize fine-tuning by gradually adding noise to the action
during the fine-tuning process (see Appendix E.9 for details). We find that Gaussian and GMM’s perfor-
mance both collapse, while with DPPO, the performance is robust to the noise if at least four denoising
steps are used. This property also allows DPPO to apply significant noise to the sampled actions, simulating
an imperfect low-level controller to facilitate sim-to-real transfer in Section 5.4. In Fig. 11 (right), we also
find DPPO enjoys greater training stability when fine-tuning long action chunks, e.g., up to Ta = 16, while
Gaussian and GMM can fail to improve at all.

Fig. 12 visualizes how DPPO affects the multi-step denoising process. Over fine-tuning iterations, the
action distribution gradually converges through the denoising steps — the iterative refinement is largely
preserved, as opposed to, e.g., “collapsing” to the optimal actions at the first fine-tuned denoising step or the
final one. We postulate this contributes to the training stability of DPPO.

Noise level

Figure 11: Training stability. Fine-tuning performance (averaged over five seeds, standard deviation not
shown) after pre-training with M2. (Left) Noise is injected into the applied actions after a few training
iterations. (Right) The action chunk size Ta is varied.

DPPO
Gaussian
GMM
Denoising steps
Itr 0

k=0
k=9

Fine-tuning

iterations

Itr 4

Itr 8

Final

Figure 12: Preserving the iterative refinement. The 2D actions from 50 trajectories at the branching
point through fine-tuning iterations after pre-training with M2. For DPPO, we also visualize the action
distribution through the final denoising steps at each fine-tuning iteration.

Benefit 3: Robust and generalizable fine-tuned policy.
DPPO also generates final policies robust to
perturbations in dynamics and the initial state distribution. In Fig. 13, we again add noise to the actions
sampled from the fine-tuned policy (no noise applied during training) and find that DPPO policy exhibits
strong robustness to the noise compared to the Gaussian policy. DPPO policy also converges to the (near-
)optimal path from a larger distribution of initial states. This finding echoes theoretical guarantees that
Diffusion Policy, capable of representing complex multi-modal data distribution, can effectively deconvolve
noise from noisy states [10], a property used in Chen et al. [15] to stabilize long-horizon video generation.

Figure 13: Policy robustness after fine-tuning. Green dot / box indicates the initial state region.

7
Conclusion and Future Work

We present Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization (DPPO) for fine-tuning a pre-trained Diffusion Policy with
the policy gradient method. DPPO leverages the sequential nature of the diffusion denoising process and
fine-tunes the entire chain of diffusion MDPs. DPPO exhibits structured online exploration, strong training
stability, and robustness and generalization at deployment. We demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness
of DPPO fine-tuning in various RL and robotics benchmarks, as well as strong sim-to-real transfer of a
DPPO policy in a long-horizon, multi-stage manipulation task.
We believe DPPO will become an important component in the pre-training-plus-fine-tuning pipeline for
training general-purpose real-world robotic policies. To this end, we hope in future work to further showcase
the promise of DPPO for simulation-to-real transfer [18, 19, 52, 77] in which we fine-tune a vision-based
policy that has been pre-trained on a variety of diverse tasks. We expect this pre-training to provide a
large and diverse expert data manifold, of which, as we have shown in Section 6, DPPO is well-suited
to take advantage for better exploration during fine-tuning. We are also excited to understand how DPPO
can fit together with other decision-making tools such as model-based planning [45] and decision-making
aided by video prediction [15]; these tools may help address the main limitation of DPPO — its lower
sample efficiency than off-policy methods — and unlocking performing practical RL in physical hardware
or generative simulation (e.g., video-based [13, 104]). Finally, as noted in the introduction, we eagerly
anticipate applications of DPPO in domains beyond robotics, where diffusion models have shown promise
for combinatorial search and sequence modeling [56, 73].

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Lirui Wang and Terry Suh for helpful discussions in the early stage of the project.
The authors were partially supported by the Toyota Research Institute (TRI). This article solely reflects the
opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.

References

[1] J. Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning. 2018.
[2] A. Ajay, Y. Du, A. Gupta, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. S. Jaakkola, and P. Agrawal. Is conditional generative
modeling all you need for decision making? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[3] M. Alakuijala, G. Dulac-Arnold, J. Mairal, J. Ponce, and C. Schmid. Residual reinforcement learning
from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08050, 2021.
[4] O. M. Andrychowicz, B. Baker, M. Chociej, R. Jozefowicz, B. McGrew, J. Pachocki, A. Petron,
M. Plappert, G. Powell, A. Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 2020.
[5] L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, and P. Agrawal. Juicer: Data-efficient imitation learning for
robotic assembly. arXiv, 2024.
[6] L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, M. Torne, and P. Agrawal. From imitation to refinement–residual
rl for precise visual assembly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16677, 2024.
[7] P. J. Ball, L. Smith, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning with offline
data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1577–1594. PMLR, 2023.
[8] C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer, 2006.

[9] K. Black, M. Janner, Y. Du, I. Kostrikov, and S. Levine. Training diffusion models with reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023.
[10] A. Block, A. Jadbabaie, D. Pfrommer, M. Simchowitz, and R. Tedrake. Provable guarantees for
generative behavior cloning: Bridging low-level stability and high-level behavior. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[11] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai
gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[12] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2020.
[13] J. Bruce, M. D. Dennis, A. Edwards, J. Parker-Holder, Y. Shi, E. Hughes, M. Lai, A. Mavalankar,
R. Steigerwald, C. Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In Forty-first Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[14] S. H. Chan. Tutorial on diffusion models for imaging and vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18103,
2024.
[15] B. Chen, D. M. Monso, Y. Du, M. Simchowitz, R. Tedrake, and V. Sitzmann. Diffusion forcing:
Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01392, 2024.
[16] H. Chen, C. Lu, C. Ying, H. Su, and J. Zhu. Offline reinforcement learning via high-fidelity generative
behavior modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14548, 2022.
[17] T. Chen, J. Xu, and P. Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. In Conference on
Robot Learning, 2022.
[18] Y. Chen, C. Wang, L. Fei-Fei, and C. K. Liu. Sequential dexterity: Chaining dexterous policies for
long-horizon manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00987, 2023.
[19] C. Chi, B. Burchfiel, E. Cousineau, S. Feng, and S. Song.
Iterative residual policy: for goal-
conditioned dynamic manipulation of deformable objects. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2024.
[20] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion policy:
Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
2024.
[21] K. Clark, P. Vicol, K. Swersky, and D. J. Fleet. Directly fine-tuning diffusion models on differentiable
rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17400, 2023.
[22] Z. Ding and C. Jin. Consistency models as a rich and efficient policy class for reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16984, 2023.
[23] L. Engstrom, A. Ilyas, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, F. Janoos, L. Rudolph, and A. Madry. Implemen-
tation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and trpo. In International conference on learning
representations, 2019.
[24] Y. Fan and K. Lee.
Optimizing ddpm sampling with shortcut fine-tuning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.13362, 2023.
[25] Y. Fan, O. Watkins, Y. Du, H. Liu, M. Ryu, C. Boutilier, P. Abbeel, M. Ghavamzadeh, K. Lee, and
K. Lee. Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[26] C. Fefferman, S. Mitter, and H. Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, 2016.
[27] P. Florence, L. Manuelli, and R. Tedrake. Self-supervised correspondence in visuomotor policy learn-
ing. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2019.

[28] P. Florence, C. Lynch, A. Zeng, O. A. Ramirez, A. Wahid, L. Downs, A. Wong, J. Lee, I. Mordatch,
and J. Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. In Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022.
[29] J. Fu, A. Kumar, O. Nachum, G. Tucker, and S. Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep data-driven rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020.
[30] Z. Fu, T. Z. Zhao, and C. Finn. Mobile aloha: Learning bimanual mobile manipulation with low-cost
whole-body teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02117, 2024.
[31] W. Goo and S. Niekum. Know your boundaries: The necessity of explicit behavioral cloning in offline
rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00695, 2022.
[32] A. Gupta, V. Kumar, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and K. Hausman. Relay policy learning: Solving long-
horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11956, 2019.
[33] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep
reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning,
pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
[34] S. Haldar, J. Pari, A. Rai, and L. Pinto. Teach a robot to fish: Versatile imitation from one minute of
demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01497, 2023.
[35] P. Hansen-Estruch, I. Kostrikov, M. Janner, J. G. Kuba, and S. Levine. Idql: Implicit q-learning as an
actor-critic method with diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10573, 2023.
[36] M. Heo, Y. Lee, D. Lee, and J. J. Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible real-world benchmark for
long-horizon complex manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12821, 2023.
[37] T. Hester, M. Vecerik, O. Pietquin, M. Lanctot, T. Schaul, B. Piot, D. Horgan, J. Quan, A. Sendonaris,
I. Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[38] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 2020.
[39] J. Ho, W. Chan, C. Saharia, J. Whang, R. Gao, A. Gritsenko, D. P. Kingma, B. Poole, M. Norouzi,
D. J. Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
[40] H. Hu, S. Mirchandani, and D. Sadigh. Imitation bootstrapped reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.02198, 2023.
[41] S. Huang, R. F. J. Dossa, C. Ye, J. Braga, D. Chakraborty, K. Mehta, and J. G. AraÃšjo. Cleanrl: High-
quality single-file implementations of deep reinforcement learning algorithms. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 2022.
[42] Z. Huang, L. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Bin, and W. Yang.
Protein-ligand interaction prior for binding-aware 3d molecule diffusion models.
In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[43] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. Learning
agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science Robotics, 2019.
[44] M. T. Jackson, M. T. Matthews, C. Lu, B. Ellis, S. Whiteson, and J. Foerster. Policy-guided diffusion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06356, 2024.
[45] M. Janner, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior
synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991, 2022.
[46] X. Jia, D. Blessing, X. Jiang, M. Reuss, A. Donat, R. Lioutikov, and G. Neumann. Towards di-
verse behaviors: A benchmark for imitation learning with human demonstrations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.14606, 2024.

[47] B. Kang, X. Ma, C. Du, T. Pang, and S. Yan. Efficient diffusion policies for offline reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[48] E. Kaufmann, L. Bauersfeld, A. Loquercio, M. Müller, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza. Champion-
level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2023.
[49] Z. Kong, W. Ping, J. Huang, K. Zhao, and B. Catanzaro. Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for
audio synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
[50] S. Lee, Y. Wang, H. Etukuru, H. J. Kim, N. M. M. Shafiullah, and L. Pinto. Behavior generation with
latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03181, 2024.
[51] K. Lei, Z. He, C. Lu, K. Hu, Y. Gao, and H. Xu. Uni-o4: Unifying online and offline deep reinforce-
ment learning with multi-step on-policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03351, 2023.
[52] J. Liang, S. Saxena, and O. Kroemer. Learning active task-oriented exploration policies for bridging
the sim-to-real gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01952, 2020.
[53] Z. Liang, Y. Mu, M. Ding, F. Ni, M. Tomizuka, and P. Luo. Adaptdiffuser: Diffusion models as
adaptive self-evolving planners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01877, 2023.
[54] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. Continu-
ous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[55] Y. Lin,
A. S. Wang,
G. Sutanto,
A. Rai,
and F. Meier.
Polymetis.

facebookresearch.github.io/fairo/polymetis/, 2021.
[56] A. Lou, C. Meng, and S. Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data
distribution. stat, 2024.
[57] J. Luo, Z. Hu, C. Xu, Y. L. Tan, J. Berg, A. Sharma, S. Schaal, C. Finn, A. Gupta, and
S. Levine. Serl: A software suite for sample-efficient robotic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.16013, 2024.
[58] S. Luo, Y. Su, X. Peng, S. Wang, J. Peng, and J. Ma. Antigen-specific antibody design and optimiza-
tion with diffusion-based generative models for protein structures. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2022.
[59] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin,
A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
[60] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu,
and R. Martín-Martín. What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manip-
ulation. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
[61] A. Nair, A. Gupta, M. Dalal, and S. Levine. Awac: Accelerating online reinforcement learning with
offline datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.
[62] M. Nakamoto, S. Zhai, A. Singh, M. Sobol Mark, Y. Ma, C. Finn, A. Kumar, and S. Levine. Cal-
ql: Calibrated offline rl pre-training for efficient online fine-tuning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[63] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In International
conference on machine learning, 2021.
[64] T. Osa, J. Pajarinen, G. Neumann, J. A. Bagnell, P. Abbeel, J. Peters, et al. An algorithmic perspective
on imitation learning. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 2018.
[65] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
A. Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2022.

[66] T. Pearce, T. Rashid, A. Kanervisto, D. Bignell, M. Sun, R. Georgescu, S. V. Macua, S. Z. Tan,
I. Momennejad, K. Hofmann, et al. Imitating human behaviour with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.10677, 2023.
[67] X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine. Advantage-weighted regression: Simple and scalable
off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177, 2019.
[68] X. B. Peng, Z. Ma, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and A. Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial motion priors for
stylized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 2021.
[69] F. Permenter and C. Yuan. Interpreting and improving diffusion models from an optimization per-
spective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04848, 2023.
[70] J. Peters and S. Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational space
control. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, 2007.
[71] D. A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 1988.
[72] B. Poole, A. Jain, J. T. Barron, and B. Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.14988, 2022.
[73] M. Popova, O. Isayev, and A. Tropsha. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug design. Science
advances, 2018.
[74] M. Psenka, A. Escontrela, P. Abbeel, and Y. Ma. Learning a diffusion model policy from rewards via
q-score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11752, 2023.
[75] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin,
J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Interna-
tional conference on machine learning, 2021.
[76] A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, A. Gupta, G. Vezzani, J. Schulman, E. Todorov, and S. Levine. Learn-
ing complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstrations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.
[77] A. Z. Ren, H. Dai, B. Burchfiel, and A. Majumdar. AdaptSim: Task-driven simulation adaptation for
sim-to-real transfer. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2023.
[78] M. Reuss, M. Li, X. Jia, and R. Lioutikov. Goal-conditioned imitation learning using score-based
diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532, 2023.
[79] M. Rigter, J. Yamada, and I. Posner. World models via policy-guided trajectory diffusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.08533, 2023.
[80] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis
with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2022.
[81] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image seg-
mentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention (MICCAI), 2015.
[82] N. Ruiz, Y. Li, V. Jampani, Y. Pritch, M. Rubinstein, and K. Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-
to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2023.
[83] S. S. Sahoo, M. Arriola, Y. Schiff, A. Gokaslan, E. Marroquin, J. T. Chiu, A. Rush, and V. Kuleshov.
Simple and effective masked diffusion language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07524, 2024.
[84] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous control
using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
[85] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[86] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning, 2015.
[87] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon.
Denoising diffusion implicit models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
[88] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative
modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
[89] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine. Nomad: Goal masked diffusion policies for naviga-
tion and exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07896, 2023.
[90] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
[91] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 1999.
[92] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, 2012.
[93] M. Torne, A. Simeonov, Z. Li, A. Chan, T. Chen, A. Gupta, and P. Agrawal.
Reconciling re-
ality through simulation: A real-to-sim-to-real approach for robust manipulation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.03949, 2024.
[94] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin.
Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.
[95] M. Vecerik, T. Hester, J. Scholz, F. Wang, O. Pietquin, B. Piot, N. Heess, T. Rothörl, T. Lampe, and
M. Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with
sparse rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
[96] S. Venkatraman, S. Khaitan, R. T. Akella, J. Dolan, J. Schneider, and G. Berseth. Reasoning with
latent diffusion in offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06599, 2023.
[97] B. Wallace, M. Dang, R. Rafailov, L. Zhou, A. Lou, S. Purushwalkam, S. Ermon, C. Xiong, S. Joty,
and N. Naik.
Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12908, 2023.
[98] J. Wang and E. Olson. Apriltag 2: Efficient and robust fiducial detection. In IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016.
[99] L. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Du, E. H. Adelson, and R. Tedrake. Poco: Policy composition from and for
heterogeneous robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02511, 2024.
[100] Z. Wang, J. J. Hunt, and M. Zhou. Diffusion policies as an expressive policy class for offline rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193, 2022.
[101] R. J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learn-
ing. Machine learning, 1992.
[102] J. Yang, M. S. Mark, B. Vu, A. Sharma, J. Bohg, and C. Finn. Robot fine-tuning made easy: Pre-
training rewards and policies for autonomous real-world reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4804–4811. IEEE, 2024.
[103] L. Yang, Z. Huang, F. Lei, Y. Zhong, Y. Yang, C. Fang, S. Wen, B. Zhou, and Z. Lin. Policy represen-
tation via diffusion probability model for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13122,
2023.
[104] M. Yang, Y. Du, K. Ghasemipour, J. Tompson, D. Schuurmans, and P. Abbeel. Learning interactive
real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114, 2023.
[105] Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuo-
motor policy learning via simple 3d representations. In ICRA 2024 Workshop on 3D Visual Repre-
sentations for Robot Manipulation.

[106] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with
low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
[107] H. Zhu, A. Gupta, A. Rajeswaran, S. Levine, and V. Kumar. Dexterous manipulation with deep rein-
forcement learning: Efficient, general, and low-cost. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pages 3651–3657. IEEE, 2019.
[108] Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, H. He, Y. Zhong, S. Zhang, Y. Yu, and W. Zhang. Diffusion models for reinforce-
ment learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01223, 2023.

A
Extended Related Work

A.1
RL training of robot policies with offline data

Here, we discuss related work in training robot policies using RL augmented with offline data to help RL
better explore online in sparse reward settings.
One simple form is to use offline data to pre-train the policy, typically using behavior cloning, and then
fine-tune the policy online. This is the approach that DPPO takes. Often, a regularization loss is applied
to constrain the fine-tuned policy to stay close to the base policy, leading to natural fine-tuned behavior and
often better learning [76, 93, 107]. DPPO does not apply regularization at fine-tuning as we find the on-
manifold exploration helps DPPO maintain natural behavior after fine-tuning Section 5.4. Another popular
approach is to learn a residual policy with RL on top of the frozen base policy [3, 34]. A closer work to ours
is from Ankile et al. [6], which trains a one-step residual non-diffusion policy with on-policy RL on top of a
pre-trained chunked diffusion policy. This approach has the benefit of being fully closed-loop but lacks the
structured on-manifold exploration of DPPO. Another hybrid approach is from Hu et al. [40], which uses
pre-trained and fine-tuned policies to sample online experiences.
Another popular line of work, instead of training a base policy using offline data, directly adds the data
in the replay buffer for online, off-policy learning in a single stage [37, 61, 95]. One recent approach from
Ball et al. [7], RLPD, further improves sample efficiency from previous off-policy methods incorporating,
e.g., critic ensembling. Luo et al. [57] demonstrate RLPD solving real-world manipulation tasks (although
generally less challenging than ones solved by DPPO).
Other approaches, including Cal-QL, build on offline RL to learn from offline data and then switch to
online RL while still sampling from offline data [35, 62, 102]. Often the distributional mismatch between
offline data and online policy needs to be addressed: Cal-QL proposes calibrated conservative Q-learning
that learns a offline Q function that lower bounds the true value of the learned policy; Lei et al. [51] propose
ensemble behavior cloning during pre-training to promote policy diversity.

A.2
Diffusion-based RL methods

This section discusses related methods that directly train or improve diffusion-based policies with RL meth-
ods. The baselines to which we compare in Section 5.1 are discussed below as well, and are highlighted in
their corresponding colors. We also refer the readers to Zhu et al. [108] for an extensive survey on diffusion
models for RL.
Most previous works have focused on the offline setting with a static dataset. One line of work fo-
cuses on state trajectory planning and guiding the denoising sampling process such that the sampled actions
satisfy some desired objectives. Janner et al. [45] apply classifier guidance that generates trajectories with
higher predicted rewards. Ajay et al. [2] introduce classifier-free guidance that avoids learning the value of
noisy states. There is another line of work that uses diffusion models as an action policy (instead of state
planner) and generally applies Q-learning. DQL [100] introduces Diffusion Q-Learning that learns a state-
action critic for the final denoised actions and backpropagates the gradient from the critic through the entire
Diffusion Policy (actor) denoising chain, akin to the usual Q-learning. IDQL [35], or Implicit Diffusion Q-
learning, proposes learning the critic to select the actions at inference time for either training or evaluation
while fitting the actor to all sampled actions. Kang et al. [47] instead propose using the critic to re-weight
the sampled actions for updating the actor itself, similar to weighted regression baselines DAWR and DRWR
introduced in our work. Goo and Niekum [31] similarly extract the policy in the spirit of AWR [67]. Chen
et al. [16] train the critic using value iteration instead based on samples from the actor. Finally, Jackson et al.
[44] explore using diffusion guidance to move offline data towards the target trajectory distribution.
We note that methods like DQL and IDQL can also be applied in the online setting. A small amount of

work also focuses entirely on the online setting. DIPO [103] differs from DQL and related work in that it
uses the critic to update the sampled actions (“action gradient”) instead of the actor — the actor is then fitted
with updated actions from the replay buffer. QSM, or Q-Score Matching [74], suggests that optimizing the
likelihood of the entire chain of denoised actions can be inefficient (contrary to our findings in the fine-tuning
setting) and instead proposes learning the optimal policy by iteratively aligning the gradient of the actor (i.e.,
score) with the action gradient of the critic. Rigter et al. [79] proposes learning a diffusion dynamic model
to generate synthetic trajectories for online training of a non-diffusion RL policy.
We note that almost all prior work in diffusion-based RL (offline or online) have relied on approximating
the state-action Q function and using it to update the diffusion actor in some form — policy gradient update
has been deemed challenging due to the multi-step denoising process [74, 103]. Inaccurate Q values may
lead to biased updates to the actor, which can lead to training collapse as it starts with decent pre-training
performance but quickly drops to zero success rate as seen in Fig. 5, also failing to recover since then due
to the sparse-reward setup. While Q-learning methods generally achieve better sample efficiency when they
can solve the task of interest, our focus has been largely on challenging long-horizon robot manipulation
tasks where the training stability is much desired.

Distinction from the policy gradient formulation in Psenka et al. [74].
There has been a different
formulation introduced in Psenka et al. [74] Sec. 3 that derives the policy gradient update for diffusion policy.
The derivation is based on converting the gradient of the log likelihood of the final denoised action to the sum
over log likelihood of individual denoising actions. This formulation, unlike DPPO, does not treat the multi-
step denoising process as a MDP. In the policy gradient update, Psenka et al. [74] sum over denoising steps
and then takes expectation over environment steps, while DPPO’s update (4.2) takes expectation over both
denoising and environment steps, potentially leading to better sample efficiency. Moreover, Psenka et al.
[74] do not propose applying PPO updates or other modifications to diffusion, and finds such vanilla form
of policy gradient update to be ineffective. We formulate DPPO independent of their work and find DPPO
highly effective in fine-tuning settings while also being competitive in training from scratch (Appendix C.3).

B
Additional details of DPPO implementation

Pseudocode.
The pseudocode for DPPO is presented in Algorithm 1. DPPO takes as input a diffusion
policy πθ trained using behavior cloning loss LBC. The policy is then fine-tuned using a PPO-style loss [85]
with careful treatment of the denoising process (Section 4).

Pre-training.
The diffusion policy πθ is pre-trained using a behavior cloning loss [38]:

LBC(θ) = E(st,a0
t )∼Doff
∥εt −εθ(a0
t , st, k)∥2
,
(A1)

where Doff is the offline dataset and εθ is the policy network predicting the sampled noise added to a0
t based
on the noisy action. We use the cosine noise schedule from Nichol and Dhariwal [63].

Environment-step advantage estimation.
We use Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [84] with
parameter λ for advantage estimation in Algorithm 1. GAE-λ approximates the advantage function using
the series

∞
X

l=0
(γλ)l¯δ¯t(t+l,k=0),
where ¯δ¯t(t,k) = ¯R¯t(t,k) + γENVVϕ(¯s¯t(t+1,k)) −Vϕ(¯s¯t(t,k)).
(A2)

ˆAλ¯t(t,k=0) =

Algorithm 1 DPPO

1: Pre-train diffusion policy πθ with offline dataset Doff using BC loss LBC(θ) Eq. (A1).

2: Initialize value function Vϕ.

3: for iteration = 1, 2, . . . do

4:
Initialize rollout buffer Ditr.

5:
πθold = πθ.

6:
for environment = 1, 2, . . . , N in parallel do

7:
Initialize state ¯s¯t(0,K) = (s0, aK
0 ) in MDP.

8:
for environment step t = 1, . . . , T, denoising step k = K −1, . . . , 0 do

9:
Sample the next denoised action ¯a¯t(t,k) = ak
t ∼πθold.

10:
if k = 0 then

11:
Run a0
t in the environment and observe ¯R¯t(t,0) and ¯s¯t(t+1,K).

12:
else

13:
Set ¯R¯t(t,k) = 0 and ¯s¯t(t,k−1) = (st, ak
t ).

14:
Add (k, ¯s¯t(t,k), ¯a¯t(t,k), ¯R¯t(t,k)) to Ditr.

15:
Compute advantage estimates Aπθold(s¯t(t,k=0), a¯t(t,k=0)) for Ditr using GAE Eq. (A2).

16:
for update = 1, 2, . . . , num_update do
▷Based on replay ratio Nθ
17:
for minibatch = 1, 2, . . . , B do

18:
Sample (k, ¯s¯t(t,k), ¯a¯t(t,k), ¯R¯t(t,k)) and Aπθold(s¯t(t,k), a¯t(t,k)) from Ditr.

19:
Compute denoising-discounted advantage ˆA¯t(t,k) = γk
DENOISEAπθold(s¯t(t,0), a¯t(t,0)).

20:
Optimize πθ using policy gradient loss Lθ Eq. (A3).

21:
Optimize Vϕ using value loss Lϕ Eq. (A4).

22: return converged policy πθ.

Notably, GAE-λ interpolates between a one-step temporal difference ( ˆAλ=0
¯t(t,k) = ¯R¯t(t,k)+γENVVϕ(¯s¯t(t+1,k))−

Vϕ(¯s¯t(t,k))) and the Monte Carlo return of the episode relative to the baseline ( ˆAλ=1
¯t(t,k) = PT−t
l=0 γl
ENV ¯R¯t(t+l,k)−
Vϕ(¯s¯t(t,k))). We refer the reader to Table A8 for additional details on GAE parameter selection and Section
C.2 for ablations on the choice of advantage estimator.
Note that in Eq. (A2) we are only concerned with k = 0, i.e., the final denoising step, calculating the
advantage for k = 0 (i.e., environment steps) but not for intermediate denoising steps. We only need to
apply denoising discounting to the calculated advantages so they can be applied to each denoising step k.

Fine-tuning.
During RL fine-tuning, we update the policy πθ using the clipped objective:

¯πθold(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t), ˆAπθold(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) clip
¯πθ(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t)

Lθ = EDitr min

ˆA¯πθold(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) ¯πθ(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t)

¯πθold(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t), 1 −ε, 1 + ε

.
(A3)

If we choose to fine-tune only the last K′ denoising steps, then we sample only those from Ditr.
Finally, we train the value function to predict the future discounted sum of rewards (i.e., discounted
returns):

T−t
X

l=0
γl
ENV ¯R¯t(t+l,k) −Vϕ(st)∥2
.
(A4)

Lϕ = EDitr
∥

Similar to all baselines in Appendix E.3, we denote Nθ and Nϕ the replay ratio for the actor (diffusion
policy) and the value critic in DPPO; in practice we always set Nθ = Nϕ. Similar to usual PPO imple-
mentations [41], the batch updates in an iteration terminate when the KL divergence between πθ and πθold
reaches 1, although in practice we find this never happens.

Large batch size.
Since the gradient update in DPPO involves expectation over both environment steps
and denoising steps, we use a larger batch size compared to, e.g., PPO training with Gaussian policy pa-
rameterization. Roughly we use the batch size from Gaussian training times the number of the fine-tuned
denoising steps; in some cases like ROBOMIMIC we also observe that a much smaller batch size (close to
that of Gaussian training) can be used and significantly improves sample efficiency.

Gradient clipping ratio.
We find the PPO clipping ratio, ε, can affect the training stability significantly
in DPPO (as well as in Gaussian and GMM policies) especially in sparse-reward manipulation tasks. In
practice we find that, a good indicator of the amount of clipping leading to optimal training efficiency, is
to aim for a clipping fraction (fraction of individual samples being clipped in a batch) of 10% to 20%. For
each method in different tasks, we vary ε in {.1, .01, .001} and choose the highest value that satisfies the
clipping fraction target. Empirically we also find that, using a higher ε for earlier denoising steps in DPPO
further improves training stability in manipulation tasks. Denote εk the clipping value at denoising step k,
and in practice we set εk=(K−1) = 0.1εk=0, and it follows an exponential schedule among intermediate k.

C
Additional experimental results

C.1
Comparing to demo-augmented RL baselines using diffusion policy instead

In Section 5.2 we compare DPPO with other demo-augmented RL methods, namely, RLPD, Cal-QL, and
IBRL — DPPO uses diffusion policy while the baselines use Gaussian policy. Here we experiment with
using diffusion policies for the baselines and the results are shown in Fig. A1. We use either action chunk
size Ta = 1 or Ta = 4. We see similar results as in Fig. 6 using Gaussian policies that RLPD and Cal-QL
fails to solve the task at all. We believe that the worse performance of Cal-QL is due to the offline RL
objective (based on learning the state-action Q function) making learning precise continuous actions needed
in ROBOMIMIC tasks very difficult, regardless of the policy parameterization, which corroborates our origi-
nal finding in Section 5.1 when comparing DPPO to Q-learning-based diffusion RL methods. Compared to
RLPD that trains with the SAC objective and expert data in the replay buffer, IBRL, using BC pre-training,
is able to learn a base policy more effectively and uses it for online data collection. DPPO benefits from
directly fine-tuning the pre-trained policy (instead of training a new one using experiences from the pre-
trained policy), and achieves similar or better sample efficiency before 1e6 steps compared to IBRL, and
converges to ∼100% success rates unlike IBRL saturates at lower levels (not shown).

Figure A1: Using diffusion policy for other demo-augmented RL methods. Results are averaged over
three seeds.

C.2
Ablation studies on design decisions in DPPO

1. Choice of advantage estimator.
In Section 4.3 we demonstrate how to efficiently estimate the advan-
tage used in PPO updates by learning ˜V (st) that only depends on the environment state; the advantage used
in DPPO is formally

ˆA = γk
DENOISE(¯r(¯s¯t, ¯a¯t) −˜V (st)).

We now compare this choice with learning the value of the full state ¯s¯t(t,0) that includes environment state
st and denoised action ak=1
t
. We additionally compare with the state-action Q-function estimator used in
Psenka et al. [74]8, ˜Q(st, ak=0
t
), that does not directly use the rollout reward ¯r in the advantage.
Fig. A2 shows the fine-tuning results in Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2 from GYM, and Can
and Square from ROBOMIMIC. On the simpler Hopper-v2, we observe that the two baselines, both esti-
mating the value of some action, achieves higher reward during fine-tuning than DPPO’s choice. However,
in the more challenging tasks, the environment-state-only advantage used in DPPO consistently leads to the
most improved performance. We believe estimating the accurate value of applying a continuous and high-
dimensional action can be challenging, and this is exacerbated by the high stochasticity of diffusion-based
policies and the action chunk size. The results here corroborate the findings in Section 5.1 that off-policy
Q-learning methods can perform well in Hopper-v2 and Walker2D-v2, but often exhibit training insta-
bility in manipulation tasks from ROBOMIMIC.

Figure A2: Choice of advantage estimator. Results are averaged over five seeds in Hopper-v2 and
HalfCheetah-v2 and three seeds in Can and Square.

Denoising discount factor.
We further examine how γDENOISE in the DPPO advantage estimator affects
fine-tuning. Using a smaller value (i.e., more discount) has the effect of downweighting the contribution of
earlier denoising steps in the policy gradient. Fig. A3 shows the fine-tuning results in the same four tasks
with varying γDENOISE ∈[0.5, 0.8, 0.9, 1]. We find in Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2 γDENOISE = 0.8
leads to better efficiency while smaller γDENOISE = 0.5 slows training. The value does not affect training
noticeably in Can. In Square the smaller γDENOISE = 0.5 works slightly better. Overall in manipulation
tasks, DPPO training seems relatively robust to this choice.

2. Choice of diffusion noise schedule.
As introduced in Section 4.3, we find it helpful to clip the diffusion
noise σk to a higher minimum value σexp
min to ensure sufficient exploration. In Figure A4, we perform analysis
on varying σexp
min ∈{.001, .01, .1, .2} (keeping σprob
min = .1 to evaluate likelihoods). Although in Can the
choice of σexp
min does not affect the fine-tuning performance, in Square a higher σexp
min = 0.1 is required to

8Psenka et al. [74] applies off-policy training with double Q-learning (according to its open-source implementation) and policy
gradient over the denoising steps. Note that this is a baseline in Psenka et al. [74] that is conjectured to be inefficient. We follow
the same except for applying on-policy PPO updates.

Figure A3: Choice of denoising discount factor. Results are averaged over five seeds in Hopper-v2 and
HalfCheetah-v2 and three seeds in Can and Square.

prevent the policy from collapsing. We conjecture that this is due to limited exploration causing policy over-
optimizing the collected samples that exhibit limited state-action coverage. We also visualize the trajectories
at the beginning of fine-tuning in Avoid task from D3IL. With higher σexp
min, the trajectories still remain near
the two modes of the pre-training data but exhibit a higher coverage in the state space — we believe this
additional coverage leads to better exploration. Anecdotally, we find terminating the denoising process
early can also provide exploration noise and lead to comparable results, but it requires a more involved
implementation around the denoising MDP.

Training trajectories at the beginning of ﬁne-tuning

0.1
0.01
0.001

Figure A4: Choice of minimum diffusion noise. Results are averaged over three seeds. Note in Left,
with higher minimum noise level, the sampled trajectories exhibit wider coverage at the two modes but still
maintain the overall structure.

3. Choice of the number of fine-tuned denoising steps.
We examine how the number of fine-tuned
denoising steps in DPPO, K′, affects the fine-tune performance and wall-clock time in Fig. A5. We show
the curves of individual runs (three for each K′) instead of the average as their wall-clock times (X-axis) are
not perfectly aligned. Generally, fine-tuning too few denoising steps (e.g., 3) can lead to subpar asymptotic
performance and slower convergence especially in Can. Fine-tuning 10 steps leads to the overall best
efficiency. Similar results are also shown in Fig. A8 with Avoid task. Lastly, we note that the GPU
memory usage scales linearly with K′.
We note that the findings here mostly correlate with those from varying the denoising discount factor,
γDENOISE. Discounting the earlier denoising steps in the policy gradient can be considered as a soft version
of hard limiting the number of fine-tuned denoising steps. Depending on the amount of fine-tuning needed
from the pre-trained action distribution, one can flexibly adjust γDENOISE and K′ to achieve the best efficiency.

C.3
Effect of expert data

We investigate the effect of the amount of pre-training expert data on fine-tuning performance. In Fig. A6 we
compare DPPO and Gaussian in Hopper-v2, Square, and One-leg task from FURNITURE-BENCH,
using varying numbers of expert data (episodes) denoted in the figure. Overall, we find DPPO can bet-
ter leverage the pre-training data and fine-tune to high success rates. Notably, DPPO obtains non-trivial
performance (60% success rate) on One-leg from only 10 episode of demonstrations.

Figure A5: Choice of number of fine-tuned denoising steps, K′. Individual runs are shown. The curves
are smoothed using a Savitzky–Golay filter.

Figure A6: Varying the number of expert demonstrations. The numbers in the legends indicates the
number of episodes used in pre-training.

Training from scratch.
In Fig. A7 we compare DPPO (10 denoising steps) and Gaussian trained from
scratch (no pre-training on expert data) in the three OpenAI GYM tasks. As using larger action chunk sizes
Ta leads to poor from-scratch training shown in Fig. A6, we focus on single-action chunks Ta = 1 (and
Tp = 1) as is typical in RL benchmarking. Though we find Gaussian trains faster than DPPO (expected
since DPPO solves an MDP with longer effective horizon), DPPO still attains reasonable final performance.
However, due to the multi-step (10) denoising sampling, DPPO takes about 6× wall-clock time compared
to Gaussian. We hope that future work will explore how to design the training curriculum of denoising steps
for the best balance of training performance and wall-clock efficiency.

Figure A7: No expert data / pre-training with GYM tasks. Results are averaged over five seeds.

C.4
Comparing to other policy parameterizations in Avoid

Figure A8 depicts the performance of various parameterizations of DPPO (with differing numbers of fine-
tuned denoising steps, K′) to Gaussian and GMM baselines. We study the Avoid task from D3IL, after
pre-training with the data from M1, M2, M3 as described in Section 6. We find that, for K′ ∈{15, 20},
DPPO attains the highest performance of all methods and trains the quickest in terms of environment steps;
on M1, M2, it appears to attain the greatest terminal performance as well. K′ = 10 appears slightly better
than, but roughly comparable to, the Gaussian baseline, with GMM and K′ < 10 performing less strongly.

Figure A8: Fine-tuning performance (averaged over five seeds, standard deviation not shown) after pre-
training with M1, M2, and M3 in Avoid task from D3IL. DPPO (K = 20), Gaussian, and GMM policies
are compared. We also sweep the number of fine-tuned denoising steps K′ in DPPO.

C.5
Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the easier tasks from ROBOMIMIC

Figure A9 compares the performance of DPPO to Gaussian and GMM baslines, across a variety of architec-
tures, and with state and pixel inputs, in Lift and Can environments in the ROBOMIMIC suite. Compared
to the Square and Transport (results shown in Section 5), these environments are considered to be “eas-
ier”, and this is reflected in the greater performance of DPPO and Gaussian baselines (GMM still exhibits
subpar performance). Nonetheless, DPPO still achieves similar or even better sample efficiency compared
to Gaussian baseline.

Figure A9: Comparing to other policy parameterizations in the easier Lift and Can tasks from
ROBOMIMIC, with state (left) or pixel (right) observation. Results are averaged over three seeds.

C.6
Comparing to policy gradient using exact likelihood of Diffusion Policy

Here we experiment another novel method (which, to our knowledge, has not been explicitly studied in
any previous work) for performing policy gradient with diffusion-based policies. Although diffusion model
does not directly model the action likelihood, pθ(a0|s), there have been ways to estimate the value, e.g.,
by solving the probability flow ODE that implements DDPM [88]. We refer the readers to Appendix. D in
Song et al. [88] for a comprehensive exposition. We follow the official open-source code from Song et al.9,

9

and implement policy gradient (single-level MDP) that uses the exact action likelihood πθ(at|st) (3.1).

Fig. A10 shows the comparison between DPPO and diffusion policy gradient using exact likelihood
estimate. Exact policy gradient improves the base policy in Hopper-v2 but does not outperform DPPO. It
also requires more runtime and GPU memory as it backpropagates through the ODE. In the more challenging
Can its success rate drops to zero. Moreover, policy gradient with exact likelihood does not offer the
flexibility of fine-tuning fewer-than-K denoising steps or discounting the early denoising steps that DPPO
offers, which have shown in Appendix C.2 to often improve fine-tuning efficiency.

Figure A10: Comparing to diffusion policy gradient with exact action likelihood. Results are averaged
over five seeds in Hopper-v2 and HalfCheetah-v2, and three seeds in Can.

C.7
Ablating Structured Exploration in DPPO

Here we provide additional evidence on how structured exploration of DPPO (Section 6) aids RL fine-
tuning. While Fig. A8 compares DPPO with Gaussian and GMM policies and shows DPPO trajectories
achieve wide coverage and stay near the expert data manifold, in Fig. A11 we ablate such structured explo-
ration within DPPO. We use DDIM [87] such that actions can be sampled deterministically — this allows
us to sample trajectories without adding any noise to intermediate denoising steps but only to the final de-
noised action (k = 0), and compare that to DPPO with noise added to all denoising steps. In both cases,
we consider the minimum noise level σexp
min of 0.05 and 0.1. We see in Fig. A11 that with higher noise level,
DPPO trajectories cover the expert data modes well without exploring aggressively into new modes, while
in the case of only adding noise to the final step, the trajectories become less structured especially in M3.
Then we run both exploration schemes in Can and Square from ROBOMIMIC, and Fig. A3 right shows
the original DPPO setup achieves faster convergence than when noise is only added to the final step. This
result, on top of results from Section 5.3 showing DPPO achiving better sample efficiency than Gaussian
and GMM policies, showcases the benefit of structured exploration in fine-tuning.

D
Reporting of Wall-Clock Times

Comparing to other diffusion-based RL algorithms Section 5.1.
Table A1 and Table A2 shows the the
wall-clock time used in each OpenAI GYM task and ROBOMIMIC task. In GYM tasks, on average DPPO
trains 41%, 37%, and 12% faster than DAWR, DIPO, and DQL, respectively, which all require a significant
amount of gradient updates per sample to train stably. QSM, DRWR, and IDQL trains 43%, 33%, and
7% faster than DPPO, respectively. ROBOMIMIC tasks are more expensive to simulate, especially with
Transport task, and thus the wall-clock difference is smaller among the different methods. All methods
use comparable time except for DIPO that uses slightly more on average.

Figure A11: Ablating Structured Exploration in DPPO. (Left) Sampled trajectories with noise added to
all denoising steps vs. only to the last step k = 0 in Avoid. (Right) Results are averaged over three seeds
in Can and Square.

Method
Task

Hopper-v2
Walker2D-v2
HalfCheetah-v2

DRWR
11.3
12.7
10.4
DAWR
30.4
30.7
27.1
DIPO
27.8
27.9
26.0
IDQL
16.3
16.1
15.5
DQL
20.5
20.5
17.6
QSM
9.6
9.9
9.7
DPPO
16.6
18.3
16.8

Table A1: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in OpenAI GYM tasks when com-
paring diffusion-based RL algorithms. Each iteration involves 500 environment timesteps in each of the 40
parallelized environments running on 40 CPU threads and a NVIDIA RTX 2080 GPU (20000 steps total).

Method
Task

Lift
Can
Square
Transport

DRWR
32.5
39.5
59.8
346.1
DAWR
38.6
46.0
70.5
354.3
DIPO
43.9
51.6
73.3
359.7
IDQL
33.8
41.7
63.7
349.9
DQL
36.9
44.4
68.5
353.5
QSM
31.8
44.5
68.7
322.5
DPPO
35.2
42.0
65.6
350.3

Table A2: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with state in-
put when comparing diffusion-based RL algorithms. Each iteration involves 4 episodes (1200 environment
timesteps for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport) from each of the 50 paral-
lelized environments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU (60000, 80000, 160000 steps).

Comparing to other policy parameterizations and architecture Section 5.3 and Section 5.4.
Table A3
and Table A4 shows the wall-clock time used in fine-tuning in each ROBOMIMIC task with state or pixel
input, respectively. Gaussian and GMM use similar times and Transformer is slightly more expensive than
MLP. On average with state input, DPPO-MLP trains 24%, 21%, 24%, and 22% slower than baselines
due to the more expensive diffusion sampling. DPPO-UNet requires more time with the extensive use of
convolutional and normalization layers and trains on average 49% slower than DPPO-MLP. On average with
pixel input, DPPO-ViT-MLP trains 14% slower than Gaussian-ViT-MLP — the difference is smaller than
the state input case as the rendering in simulation can be expensive. Table A5 shows the wall-clock time
used in FURNITURE-BENCH tasks. DPPO-UNet trains 20% slower than Gaussian-MLP on average.

Method
Task

Lift
Can
Square
Transport

Gaussian-MLP
27.7
35.7
56.2
255.6
Gaussian-Transformer
29.8
37.1
57.8
266.1
GMM-MLP
28.0
36.2
55.2
254.5
GMM-Transformer
29.5
37.4
58.1
260.2
DPPO-MLP
35.6
43.3
65.0
350.5
DPPO-UNet
83.6
92.7
130.4
431.1

Table A3: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with state input
when comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 4 episodes (1200 environment timesteps
for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport) from each of the 50 parallelized envi-
ronments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU (60000, 80000, 160000 steps).

Method
Task

Lift
Can
Square
Transport

Gaussian-ViT-MLP
153.6
173.1
277.0
770.0
DPPO-ViT-MLP
194.9
202.5
328.5
871.3

Table A4: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in ROBOMIMIC tasks with pixel input
when comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 4 episodes (1200 environment timesteps
for Lift and Can, 1600 for Square, and 3200 for Transport) from each of the 50 parallelized envi-
ronments running on 50 CPU threads and a NVIDIA L40 GPU (60000, 80000, 160000 steps).

Method
Task

One-leg
Lamp
Round-table

Gaussian-MLP
101.8
202.8
168.7
DPPO-UNet
148.4
258.2
188.6

Table A5: Wall-clock time in seconds for a single training iteration in FURNITURE-BENCH tasks when
comparing policy parameterizations. Each iteration involves 1 episodes (700 environment timesteps for
One-leg, and 1000 for Lamp and Round-table) from each of the 1000 parallelized environments
running on a NVIDIA L40 GPU (700000, 1000000, 1000000 steps).

E
Additional Experimental Details

Task / Dataset
Obs dim - State
Obs dim - Pixel
Act dim
T
Sparse reward ?

GYM
Hopper-v2
11
-
3
1000
No
Walker2D-v2
17
-
6
1000
No
HalfCheetah-v2
17
-
6
1000
No

FRANKA-KITCHEN
Kitchen-Complete-v0
60
-
9
280
Yes
Kitchen-Partial-v0
60
-
9
280
Yes
Kitchen-Mixed-v0
60
-
9
280
Yes

Lift
19
-
7
300
Yes
Can
23
-
7
300
Yes
Square
23
-
7
400
Yes
Transport
59
-
14
800
Yes

ROBOMIMIC, state input

Lift
9
96×96
7
300
Yes
Can
9
96×96
7
300
Yes
Square
9
96×96
7
400
Yes
Transport
18
2×96×96
14
800
Yes

ROBOMIMIC, pixel input

FURNITURE-BENCH
One-leg
58
-
10
700
Yes
Lamp
44
-
10
1000
Yes
Round-table
44
-
10
1000
Yes

D3IL
M1
4
-
2
100
Yes
M2
4
-
2
100
Yes
M3
4
-
2
100
Yes

Table A6: Comparison of the different tasks considered. “Obs dim - State”: dimension of the state
observation input. “Obs dim - State”: dimension of the pixel observation input. “Act dim - State”: dimension
of the action space. T: maximum number of steps in an episode. “Sparse reward ?”: whether sparse reward
is used in training instead of dense reward.

E.1
Details of policy architectures used in all experiments

MLP.
For most of the experiments, we use a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) with two-layer residual con-
nection as the policy head. For diffusion-based policies, we also use a small MLP encoder for the state input
and another small MLP with sinusoidal positional encoding for the denoising timestep input. Their output
features are then concatenated before being fed into the MLP head. Diffusion Policy, proposed by Chi et al.
[20], does not use MLP as the diffusion architecture, but we find it delivers comparable (or even better)
pre-training performance compared to UNet.

Transformer.
For comparing to other policy parameterizations in Section 5.3, we also consider Trans-
former as the policy architecture for the Gaussian and GMM baselines. We consider decoder only. No
dropout is used. A learned positional embedding for the action chunk is the sequence into the decoder.

UNet.
For comparing to other policy parameterizations in Section 5.3, we also consider UNet [81] as a
possible architecture for DP. We follow the implementation from Chi et al. [20] that uses sinusoidal posi-
tional encoding for the denoising timestep input, except for using a larger MLP encoder for the observation
input in each convolutional block. We find this modification helpful in more challenging tasks.

ViT.
For pixel-based experiments in Section 5.3 we use Vision-Transformer(ViT)-based image encoder
introduced by Hu et al. [40] before an MLP head. Proprioception input is appended to each channel of the
image patches. We also follow [40] and use a learned spatial embedding for the ViT output to greatly reduce
the number of features, which are then fed into the downstream MLP head.

E.2
Additional details of GYM tasks and training in Section 5.1

Pre-training.
The observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics from the pre-
training dataset. For all three tasks the policy is trained for 3000 epochs with batch size 128, learning rate
of 1e-3 decayed to 1e-4 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay of 1e-6. Exponential Moving Average
(EMA) is applied with a decay rate of 0.995.

Fine-tuning.
All methods from Section 5.1 use the same pre-trained policy. Fine-tuning is done using
online experiences sampled from 40 parallelized MuJoCo environments [92]. Reward curves shown in
Fig. 5 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with σexp
min = 0.001 (i.e., without extra noise) for 40
episodes. Each episode terminates if the default conditions are met or the episode reaches 1000 timesteps.
Detailed hyperparameters are listed in Table A7.

E.3
Descriptions of diffusion-based RL algorithm baselines in Section 5.1

DRWR:
This is a customized reward-weighted regression (RWR) algorithm [70] that fine-tunes a pre-
trained DP with a supervised objective with higher weights on actions that lead to higher reward-to-go r.
The reward is scaled with β and the exponentiated weight is clipped at wmax. The policy is updated with
experiences collected with the current policy (no buffer for data from previous iteration) and a replay ratio
of Nθ. No critic is learned.

Lθ = E¯πθ,εth
min(eβrt, wmax)∥εt −εθ(a0
t , st, k)∥2i
.

DAWR:
This is a customized advantage-weighted regression (AWR) algorithm [67] that builds on DRWR
but uses TD-bootstrapped [90] advantage estimation instead of the higher-variance reward-to-go for better
training stability and efficiency. DAWR (and DRWR) can be seen as approximately optimizing (4.2) with a
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence constraint on the policy [9, 67].
The advantage is scaled with β and the exponentiated weight is clipped at wmax. Unlike DRWR, we
follow [67] and trains the actor in an off-policy manner: recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D,
and the actor is updated with a replay ratio of Nθ.

Lθ = ED,εt
min(eβ ˆ
Aϕ(st,a0
t ), wmax)∥εt −εθ(a0
t , st, k)∥2
.

The critic is updated less frequently (we find diffusion models need many gradient updates to fit the actions)
with a replay ratio of Nϕ.
Lϕ = ED
∥ˆAϕ(st, a0
t ) −A(st, a0
t )∥2
,

where A is calculated using TD(λ), with λ as λDAWR and the discount factor γENV.

DIPO [103]:
This baseline applies “action gradient” that uses a learned state-action Q function to update
the actions saved in the replay buffer, and then has DP fitting on them without weighting.
Similar to DAWR, recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The actions (k = 0) in the buffer
are updated for MDIPO iterations with learning rate αDIPO.

am+1,k=0
t
= am,k=0
t
+ αDIPO∇ϕ ˆQϕ(st, am,k=0
t
), m = 0, . . . , MDIPO −1.

The actor is then updated with a replay ratio of Nθ.

Lθ = ED
∥εt −εθ(aMDIPO,k=0
t
, st, k)∥2
.

The critic is trained to minimize the Bellman residual with a replay ratio of Nϕ. Double Q-learning is also
applied.
Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆQϕ(st+1, ¯πθ(ak=0
t+1 |st+1)) −ˆQϕ(st, am=0,k=0
t
)∥2

IDQL [35]:
This baseline learns a state-action Q function and state V function to choose among the
sampled actions from DP. DP fits on new samples without weighting.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The state value function is updated to match
the expected Q value with an expectile loss, with a replay ratio of Nψ.

Lψ = ED
|τIDQL −1( ˆQϕ(st, a0
t ) < ˆV 2
ψ(st))|

.

The value function is used to update the Q function with a replay ratio of Nϕ.

Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆVψ(st+1) −ˆQϕ(st, a0
t )∥2
.

The actor fits all sampled experiences without weighting, with a replay ratio of Nθ.

Lθ = ED
∥εt −εθ(a0
t , st, k)∥2
.

At inference time, MIDQL actions are sampled from the actor. For training, Boltzmann exploration is applied
based on the difference between Q value of the sampled actions and and the V value at the current state. For
evaluation, the greedy action under Q is chosen.

DQL [100]:
This baseline learns a state-action Q function and backpropagates the gradient from the critic
through the entire actor (with multiple denoising steps), akin to the usual Q-learning.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The actor is then updated using both a super-
vised loss and the value loss with a replay ratio of Nθ.

Lθ = ED
∥εt −εθ(a0
t , st, k)∥2 −αDQL ˆQϕ(st, ¯πθ(a0
t |st))

,

where αDQL is a weighting coefficient. The critic is trained to minimize the Bellman residual with a replay
ratio of Nϕ. Double Q-learning is also applied.

Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆQϕ(st+1, ¯πθ(a0
t+1|st+1)) −ˆQϕ(st, a0
t )∥2

QSM [74]:
This baselines learns a state-action Q function, and then updates the actor by aligning the score
of the diffusion actor with the gradient of the Q function.
Again recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. The critic is trained to minimize the Bellman
residual with a replay ratio of Nϕ. Double Q-learning is also applied.

Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆQϕ(st+1, ¯πθ(a0
t+1|st+1)) −ˆQϕ(st, a0
t )∥2
.

The actor is updated as follows with a replay ratio of Nθ.

Lθ = ED
∥αQSM∇a ˆQϕ(st, at) −(−εθ(a0
t , st, k))∥2
,

where αQSM scales the gradient. The negative sign before εθ is from taking the gradient of the mean µ in
the denoising process.

E.4
Descriptions of RL fine-tuning algorithm baselines in Section 5.2

In this subsection, we detail the baselines RLPD, Cal-QL, and IBRL. All policies πθ are parameterized
as unimodal Gaussian.

RLPD [7]:
This baseline is based on Soft Actor Critic (SAC, Haarnoja et al. [33]) — it learns an entropy-
regularized state-action Q function, and then updates the actor by maximizing the Q function w.r.t. the
action.
A replay buffer D is initialized with offline data, and online samples are added to D. Each gradient
update uses a batch of mixed 50/50 offline and online data. An ensemble of Ncritic critics is used, and at
each gradient step two critics are randomly chosen. The critics are trained to minimize the Bellman residual
with replay ratio Nϕ:

Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆQϕ′(st+1, πθ(at+1|st+1)) −ˆQϕ(st, at)∥2
.

The target critic parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The actor minimizes the following loss with a replay
ratio of 1:
Lθ = ED
−ˆQϕ(st, at) + αent log πθ(at|st)

,

where αent is the entropy coefficient (automatically tuned as in SAC starting at 1).

Cal-QL [62]:
This baseline trains the policy µ and the action-value function Qµ in an offline phase and
then an online phase. During the offline phase only offline data is sampled for gradient update, while during
the online phase mixed 50/50 offline and online data are sampled. The critic is trained to minimize the
following loss (Bellman residual and calibrated Q-learning):

Lϕ =ED
∥(Rt + γENV ˆQϕ′(st+1, πθ(at+1|st+1))) −ˆQϕ(st, at)∥2

+ βcql(ED
max(Qϕ(st, at), V (st))

−ED
Qϕ(st, at)

),

where βcql is a weighting coefficient between Bellman residual and calibration Q-learning and V (st) is esti-
mated using Monte-Carlo returns. The target critic parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The actor minimizes
the following loss:
Lθ = ED
−ˆQϕ(st, at) + αent log πθ(at|st)

,

where αent is the entropy coefficient (automatically tuned as in SAC starting at 1).

IBRL [40]:
This baseline first pre-trains a policy µψ using behavior cloning, and for fine-tuning it trains
a RL policy πθ initialized as µψ. During fine-tuning recent experiences are saved in a replay buffer D. An
ensemble of Ncritic critics is used, and at each gradient step two critics are randomly chosen. The critics are
trained to minimize the Bellman residual with replay ratio Nϕ:

Lϕ = ED
∥(Rt + γENV
max
a′∈{aIL,aRL}
ˆQϕ′(st+1, a′) −ˆQϕ(st, at)∥2

where aIL = µψ(st+1) (no noise) and aRL ∼πθ′(st+1), and πθ′ is the target actor. The target critic
parameter ϕ′ is updated with delay. The actor minimizes the following loss with a replay ratio of 1:

Lθ = −ED ˆQϕ(st, at)

.

The target actor parameter θ′ is also updated with delay.

E.5
Additional details of FRANKA-KITCHEN tasks and training in Section 5.2

Tasks.
We consider three settings from the D4RL benchmark [29]: (1) Kitchen-Complete-v0 con-
taining demonstrations that complete the entire task (four subtasks), (2) Kitchen-Partial-v0 contain-
ing some complete demonstrations and many ones completing only subtasks, and (3) Kitchen-Mixed-v0
containing incomplete demonstrations only.

Pre-training.
The observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics from the pre-
training dataset. No history observation (proprioception or ground-truth object states) is used. All policies
are trained with batch size 128, learning rate 1e-4 decayed to 1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay
1e-6. DPPO policies are trained with 8000 epochs. For IBRL and Cal-QL we follow the hyperparameters
from the original implementations — IBRL proposes using (1) wider MLP layers and (2) dropout during
pre-training, which we follow too. We use Ta = 4 for DPPO; we also tried to use the same action chunk
size with IBRL, RLPD, and Cal-QL, but we find for all of them Ta = 1 leads to better performance.

Fine-tuning.
With DPPO, policies are fine-tuned using online experiences sampled from 40 parallelized
MuJoCo environments [92], while the baselines use only one environment (matching their original imple-
mentations). Episodes terminates when they reach maximum episode lengths (shown in Table A6) or all four
subtasks are completed. Detailed hyperparameters are listed in Table A8 — we follow the hyperparameter
choices from the original implementations of the baselines.

Larger variance with DPPO in Fig. 6.
In Fig. 6, it is shown that DPPO exhibits a larger variance in nor-
malized score with Kitchen-Partial-v0 than Cal-QL. This is due to DPPO solving either 3/4 or 2/4
subtasks in one seed (low variance within the evaluation episodes in one seed) but high variance over seeds,
whereas Cal-QL has higher variance among evaluation episodes in one seed but on average over seeds
it shows lower variance. This also highlights a notable property of DPPO: Kitchen-Partial-v0 and
Kitchen-Mixed-v0 have trajectories only completing subtasks, thus being highly multi-modal. Dif-
fusion policy can sometimes struggle to learn all the modes from pre-training, and since DPPO directly
fine-tunes the pre-trained policy, it can fail to converge to 100% success rate at fine-tuning. Cal-QL
instead learns from all offline data during fine-tuning in an off-policy manner, thus less sensitive to pre-
training performance. Nonetheless, with offline data completing tasks consistently despite varying qual-
ity (ROBOMIMIC and Kitchen-Complete-v0, which, we believe, are more realistic in the current
paradigm of robot manipulation), DPPO demonstrates much better final performance than Cal-QL and
other baselines in Fig. 6.

E.6
Additional details of ROBOMIMIC tasks and training in Section 5.3

Tasks.
We consider four tasks from the ROBOMIMIC benchmark [60]: (1) Lift: lifting a cube from the
table, (2) Can: picking up a Coke can and placing it at a target bin, (3) Square: picking up a square nut
and place it on a rod, and (4) Transport: two robot arms removing a bin cover, picking and placing a
cube, and then transferring a hammer from one container to another one.

Pre-training.
ROBOMIMIC provides the Multi-Human (MH) dataset with noisy human demonstrations
for each task, which we use to pre-train the policies. The observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1]
using min/max statistics from the pre-training dataset. No history observation (pixel, proprioception, or
ground-truth object states) is used. All policies are trained with batch size 128, learning rate 1e-4 decayed to
1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-based policies are trained with 8000 epochs,

while Gaussian and GMM policies are trained with 5000 epochs — we find diffusion models require more
gradient updates to fit the data well.

Fine-tuning.
Diffusion-based, Gaussian, and GMM pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned using online
experiences sampled from 50 parallelized MuJoCo environments [92]. Success rate curves shown in Fig. 5,
Fig. 7, and Fig. A9 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with σexp
min = 0.001 (i.e., without extra noise)
for 50 episodes. Episodes terminates only when they reach maximum episode lengths (shown in Table A6).
Detailed hyperparameters are listed in Table A9.

Pixel training.
We use the wrist camera view in Lift and Can, the third-person camera view in Square,
and the two robot shoulder camera views in Transport. Random-shift data augmentation is applied to
the camera images during both pre-training and fine-tuning. Gradient accumulation is used in fine-tuning so
that the same batch size (as in state-input training) can fit on the GPU. Detailed hyperparameters are listed
in Table A10.

E.7
Descriptions of policy parameterization baselines in Section 5.3

Gaussian.
We consider unimodal Gaussian with diagonal covariance, the most commonly used policy
parameterization in RL. The standard deviation for each action dimension, σGau, is fixed during pre-training;
we also tried to learn σGau from the dataset but we find the training very unstable. During fine-tuning σGau is
learned starting from the same fixed value and also clipped between 0.01 and 0.2. Additionally we clip the
sampled action to be within 3 standard deviation from the mean. As discusses in Appendix B, we choose
the PPO clipping ratio ε based on the empirical clipping fraction in each task. This setup is also used
in the FURNITURE-BENCH experiments. We note that we spend significant amount of efforts tuning the
Gaussian baseline, and our results with it are some of the best known ones in RL training for long-horizon
manipulation tasks (exceeding our initial expectations), e.g., reaching ∼100% success rate in Lamp with
Low randomness.

GMM.
We also consider Gaussian Mixture Model as the policy parameterization. We denote MGMM the
number of mixtures. The standard deviation for each action dimension in each mixture, σGMM, is also fixed
during pre-training. Again during fine-tuning σGMM is learned starting from the same fixed value and also
clipped between 0.01 and 0.2.

E.8
Additional details of FURNITURE-BENCH tasks and training in Section 5.4

Tasks.
We consider three tasks from the FURNITURE-BENCH benchmark [36]: (1) One-leg: assemble
one leg of a table by placing the tabletop in the fixture corner, grasping and inserting the table leg, and
screwing in the leg, (2) Lamp: place the lamp base in the fixture corner, grasp, insert, and screw in the light
bulb, and finally place the lamp shade, (3) Round-table: place a round tabletop in the fixture corner,
insert and screw in the table leg, and then insert and screw in the table base. See Fig. A12 for the visualized
rollouts in simulation.

Pre-training.
The pre-training dataset is collected in the simulated environments using a SpaceMouse10, a
6 DoF input device. The simulator runs at 10Hz. At every timestep, we read off the state of the SpaceMouse
as δa = [∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆roll, ∆pitch, ∆yaw], which is converted to a quaternion before passed to the envi-
ronment step and stored as the action alongside the current observation in the trajectory. If |∆ai| < ε ∀i

10

for some small ε = 0.05 defining the threshold for a no-op, we do not record any action nor pass it to the
environment. Discarding no-ops is important for allowing the policies to learn from demonstrations effec-
tively. When the desired number of demonstrations has been collected (typically 50), we process the actions
to convert the delta actions stored from the SpaceMouse into absolute pose actions by applying the delta
action to the current EE pose at each timestep.
The observations and actions are normalized to [−1, 1] using min/max statistics from the pre-training
dataset. No history observation (proprioception or ground-truth object states) is used, i.e., only the current
observation is passed to the policy. All policies are trained with batch size 256, learning rate 1e-4 decayed to
1e-5 with a cosine schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-based policies are trained with 8000 epochs,
while Gaussian policies are trained with 3000 epochs. Gaussian policies can easily overfit the pre-trained
dataset, while diffusion-based policies are more resilient. Gaussian policies also require a very large MLP
(∼10 million parameters) to fit the data well.

Fine-tuning.
Diffusion-based and Gaussian pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned using online experi-
ences sampled from 1000 parallelized IsaacGym environments [59]. Success rate curves shown in Fig. 8
are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with σexp
min = 0.001 (i.e., without extra noise) for 1000 episodes.
Episodes terminate only when they reach maximum episode length (shown in Table A6). Detailed hyperpa-
rameters are listed in Table A11. We find a smaller amount of exploration noise (we set σexp
min and σGau to be
0.04) is necessary for the pre-trained policy achieving nonzero success rates at the beginning of fine-tuning.

One-leg

Lamp

Round-table

Figure A12: Representative rollouts from simulated FURNITURE-BENCH tasks.

Hardware setup - robot control.
The physical robot used is a Franka Emika Panda arm. The policies
output a sequence of desired end-effector poses in the robot base frame to control the robot. These poses are
converted into joint position targets through differential inverse kinematics. We calculate the desired end-
effector velocity as the difference between the desired and current poses divided by the delta time dt = 1/10.
We then convert this to desired joint velocities using the Jacobian and compute the desired joint positions
with a first-order integration over the current joint positions and desired velocity. The resulting joint position
targets are passed to a low-level joint impedance controller provided by Polymetis [55], running at 1kHz.

Hardware setup - state estimation.
To deploy state-based policies on real hardware, we utilize AprilTags
[98] for part pose estimation. The FURNITURE-BENCH [36] task suite provides AprilTags for each part and
code for estimating part poses from tag detections. The process involves several steps: (1) detecting tags
in the camera frame, (2) mapping tag detections to the robot frame for policy compatibility, (3) utilizing
known offsets between tags and object centers in the simulator, and (4) calibrating the camera pose using an

AprilTag at a known position relative to the robot base. Despite general accuracy, detections can be noisy,
especially during movement or partial occlusion, which the One-leg task features. Since the task requires
high precision, we find the following to help make the estimation reliable enough:

• Camera coverage: We find detection quality sensitive to distance and angle between the camera and tag.
This issue is likely due to the RealSense D435 camera having mediocre image quality and clarity and
the relatively small tags. To remedy this, we opt to use 4 cameras roughly evenly spread out around the
scene to ensure that at least one camera has a solid view of a tag on all the parts (i.e., as close as possible
with a straight-on view). To find the best camera positions, we start with having a camera in each of the
cardinal directions around the scene. Then, we adjust the pose of each to get it as close as possible to the
objects while still covering the necessary workspace and capturing the base tag for calibration. Moving
the robot arm around the scene to avoid the worst occlusion is also helpful.

• Lighting: Even with better camera coverage and placement, detection quality depends on having crisp
images. We find proper lighting helpful to improve image quality. In particular, the scene should be well
and evenly lit around the scene without causing reflections in either the tag or table.

• Filtering: Bad detections can sometimes cause the resulting pose estimate to deviate significantly from
the true pose, i.e., jumping several centimeters from one frame to the next. This usually only happens
on isolated frames, and thus before “accepting” a given detection, we check if the new position and
orientation are within 5 cm and 20 degrees of the previously accepted pose. In addition, we apply low-
pass filtering on the detection using a simple exponential average (with α = 0.25) to smooth out the
high-frequency noise.

• Averaging: The objects have multiple tags that can be detected from multiple cameras. After performing
the filtering step, we average all pose estimates for the same object across different tags and cameras,
which also helps smooth out noise. This alone, however, does not fully cancel the case when a single
detection has a large jump, as this can severely skew the average, still necessitating a filtering step.
Having multiple cameras benefits this step, too, as it provides more detections to average over.

• Caching part pose in hand: A particularly difficult phase of the task to achieve good detections is when
the robot transports the table leg from the initial position to the tabletop for insertion. The main problems
are that the movement can blur the images, and the grasping can cause occlusions. Therefore, we found
it helpful to assume that once the part was grasped by the robot, it would not move in the grasp until the
gripper opened. With this, we can “cache” the pose of the part relative to the end-effector once the object
is fully grasped and use this instead of relying on detections during the movement.

• Normalization pitfalls and clipping: We generally use min-max normalization of the state observations
to ensure observations are in [−1, 1]. The tabletop part moves very little in the z-direction demonstration
data, meaning the resulting normalization limits (the minimum and maximum value of the data) can be
very close, xmax−xmin ≈0. With these tight limits, the noise in the real-world detection can be amplified
greatly as xnorm =
x−xmin
xmax−xmin . Therefore, ensure that normalization ranges are reasonable. As an extra
safeguard, clipping the data to [−1, 1] can also help.

• Only estimate necessary states: Despite the One-leg task having 5 parts, only 2 are manipulated.
Only estimating the pose of those parts can eliminate a lot of noise. In particular, the pose of the 3 legs
that are not used and the obstacle (the U-shaped fixture) can be set to an arbitrary value from the dataset.

• Visualization for debugging: We use the visualization tool MeshCat11 extensively for debugging of
state estimation. The tool allows for easy visualizations of poses of all relevant objects in the scene,

11

like the robot end-effector and parts, which makes sanity-checking the implementation far easier than
looking at raw numbers.

Hardware evaluation.
We perform 20 trials for each method. We adopt a single-blind model selection
process: at the beginning of each trial, we first randomize the initial state. Then, we randomly select a
method and roll it out, but the experimenter does not observe which model is used. We record the success
and failure of each trial and then aggregate statistics for each model after all trials are completed.

Domain randomization for sim-to-real transfer.
To facilitate the sim-to-real transfer, we apply addi-
tional domain randomization to the simulation training. We record the range of observation noises in hard-
ware without any robot motion and then apply the same amount of noise to state observations in simulation.
We find the state estimation in hardware particularly sensitive to the object heights. Also, we apply random
noise (zero mean with 0.03 standard deviation) to the sampled action from DPPO to simulate the imperfect
low-level controller; we find adding such noise to the Gaussian policy leads to zero task success rate while
DPPO is robust to it (also see discussion in Section 6).

BC regularization loss used for Gaussian baseline.
Since the fine-tuned Gaussian policy exhibits very
jittery behavior and leads to zero success rate in real evaluation, we further experiment with adding a behav-
ior cloning (BC) regularization loss in fine-tuning with the Gaussian baseline. The combined loss follows

K−1
X

Lθ,+BC = Lθ −αBCEπθold[

k=0
log πθpre-trained(ak
t |ak+1
t
, st)],

where πθpre-trained is the frozen BC-only policy. The extra term encourages the newly sampled actions from
the fine-tuned policy to remain high-likelihood under the BC-only policy. We set αBC = 0.1. However,
although this regularization reduces the sim-to-real gap, it also significantly limits fine-tuning, leading to
the fine-tuning policy saturating at 53% success rate shown in Fig. 8.

E.9
Additional details of Avoid task from D3IL and training in Section 6

Pre-training.
We split the original dataset from D3IL based on the three settings, M1, M2, and M3; in
each setting, observations and actions are normalized to [0, 1] using min/max statistics. All policies are
trained with batch size 16 (due to the small dataset size), learning rate 1e-4 decayed to 1e-5 with a cosine
schedule, and weight decay 1e-6. Diffusion-based policies are trained with about 15000 epochs, while
Gaussian and GMM policies are trained with about 10000 epochs; we manually examine the trajectories
from different pre-trained checkpoints and pick ones that visually match the expert data the best.

Fine-tuning.
Diffusion-based, Gaussian, and GMM pre-trained policies are then fine-tuned using online
experiences sampled from 50 parallelized MuJoCo environments [92]. Reward curves shown in Fig. 11
and Fig. A8 are evaluated by running fine-tuned policies with the same amount of exploration noise used in
training for 50 episodes; we choose to use the training (instead of evaluation) setup since Gaussian policies
exhibit multi-modality only with training noise. Episodes terminate only when they reach 100 steps.

Added action noise during fine-tuning.
In Fig. 11 left, we demonstrate that DPPO exhibits stronger
training stability when noise is added to the sampled actions during fine-tuning. The noise starts at the 5th
iteration. It is sampled from a uniform distribution with the lower limit ramping up to 0.1 and the upper
limit ramping up to 0.2 linearly in 5 iterations. The limits are kept the same from the 10th iteration to the
end of fine-tuning.

E.10
Listed training hyperparameters

Task(s)

Method
Parameter
GYM
Lift, Can
Square
Transport

γENV
0.99
0.999
0.999
0.999
σexp
min
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.08
σprob
min
0.1
Tp
4
4
4
8
Ta
4
4
4
8
K
20
Actor learning rate
1e-4 for DPPO and 1e-5 for others (tuned from 1e-4 to 1e-5)
Critic learning rate (if applies)
1e-3
Actor MLP dims
[512, 512, 512]
[512, 512, 512]
[1024, 1024, 1024]
[1024, 1024, 1024]
Critic MLP dims (if applies)
[256, 256, 256]

Common

β
10
wmax
100
Nθ
16
Batch size
1000

DRWR

β
10
wmax
100
λDAWR
0.95
Nθ
64
Nϕ
16
Buffer size
200000
120000
120000
120000
Batch size
1000

DAWR

αDIPO
1e-4
MDIPO
10
Nθ
64
Buffer size
1000000
Batch size
1000

DIPO

MIDQL
20
10
10
10
Nθ
128
Nϕ
128
Buffer size
1000000
250000
250000
250000
Batch size
1000

IDQL

αDQL
1
Nθ
16
Nϕ
16
Buffer eize
1000000
Batch size
1000

DQL

αQSM
10
Nθ
16
Nϕ
16
Buffer size
1000000
250000
250000
250000
Batch size
1000

QSM

γDENOISE
0.99
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
5
10
10
10
Nϕ
5
10
10
10
ε
0.01
Batch size
50000
7500
10000
10000
K′
10

DPPO

Table A7:
Fine-tuning hyperparameters for OpenAI GYM and ROBOMIMIC tasks when comparing
diffusion-based RL methods. We list shared hyperparameters and then method-specific ones.

Task(s)

Method
Parameter HalfCheetah-v2 Kitchen-Complete-v0 Kitchen-Partial-v0 Kitchen-Mixed-v0

Common
γENV
0.99

Tp
1
Ta
1
Nϕ
2 3
10310
10
Ncritic
10
5
5
5
Batch size
256

RLPD

Cal-QL
Tp
1
Ta
1
βcql
5
Batch size
256

Tp
1
Ta
1
Nϕ
5
Ncritic
5
Batch size
256

IBRL

Tp
1
4
4
4
Ta
1
4
4
4
σexp
min
0.1
σprob
min
0.1
γDENOISE
0.99
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
5
10
10
10
Nϕ
5
10
10
10
ε
0.01
Batch size
10000
5600
5600
5600
K
20
K′
10

DPPO

Method
Parameter
Can, PH
Square, PH
Can, MH
Square, MH

Common
γENV
0.999
Ta
1
Ta
1

Nϕ
3
Ncritic
5
Batch size
256

RLPD

Cal-QL
βcql
5
Batch size
256

Nϕ
3
Ncritic
5
Batch size
256

IBRL

σexp
min
0.1
σprob
min
0.1
γDENOISE
0.9
0.9
0.99
0.99
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
10
Nϕ
10
ε
0.01
Batch size
6000
15000
8000
20000
K
20
K′
10

DPPO

Table A8: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for HalfCheetah-v2, FRANKA-KITCHEN, Can, and Square
(PH or MH datasets) when comparing demo-augmented RL methods. We list hyperparameters shared by
all methods first, and then method-specific ones.

Task

Method
Parameter
Lift, Can
Square
Transport

γENV
0.999
Ta
4
4
8
Actor learning rate
1e-4
1e-5
1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
Critic learning rate
1e-3
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
10
10
8
Nϕ
10
10
8
ε
0.01 (annealed in DPPO)

Common

Gaussian, Common
σGau
0.1
0.1
0.08
Batch size
7500
10000
10000
Gaussian-MLP
Model size
552K
2.15M
1.93M
Gaussian-Transformer
Model size
675K
1.86M
1.87M

GMM, Common
MGMM
5
σGMM
0.1
0.1
0.08
Batch size
7500
10000
10000
GMM-MLP
Model size
1.15M
4.40M
4.90M
GMM-Transformer
Model size
680K
1.87M
1.89M

γDENOISE
0.99
σexp
min
0.1
0.1
0.08
σprob
min
0.1
0.1
0.1
K
20
K′
10
Batch size
75000
100000
100000
DPPO-MLP
Model size
576K
2.31M
2.43M
DPPO-UNet
Model size
652K
1.62M
1.68M

DPPO, Common

Table A9: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for ROBOMIMIC tasks with state input when comparing policy
parameterizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-specific ones.
Since the different policy parameterizations use different neural network architecture, we list the total model
size here instead of the details such as MLP dimensions.

Task

Method
Parameter
Lift, Can
Square
Transport

γENV
0.999
Ta
4
4
8
Actor learning rate
1e-4
1e-5
1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
Critic learning rate
1e-3
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
10
10
8
Nϕ
10
10
8
ε
0.01 (annealed in DPPO)

Common

Gaussian-ViT-MLP
Model size
1.03M
1.03M
1.93M
σGau
0.1
0.1
0.08
Batch size
7500
10000
10000

Model size
1.06M
1.06M
2.05M
γDENOISE
0.9
σexp
min
0.1
0.1
0.08
σprob
min
0.10
K
100
K′
5 (DDIM)
Batch size
37500
50000
50000

DPPO-ViT-MLP

Table A10: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for ROBOMIMIC tasks with pixel input when comparing policy
parameterizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-specific ones.
Since the different policy parameterizations use different neural network architecture, we list the total model
size here instead of the details such as MLP dimensions.

Task

Method
Parameter
One-leg
Lamp
Round-table

γENV
0.999
Ta
8
Actor learning rate
1e-5 (decayed to 1e-6)
Critic learning rate
1e-3
GAE λ
0.95
Nθ
5
Nϕ
5
ε
0.001

Common

Gaussian-MLP
Model size
10.64M
10.62M
10.62M
σGau
0.04
Batch size
8800

Model size
6.86M
6.81M
6.81M
γDENOISE
0.9
σexp
min
0.04
σprob
min
0.1
K
100
K′
5 (DDIM)
Batch size
44000

DPPO-UNet

Table A11: Fine-tuning hyperparameters for FURNITURE-BENCH tasks when comparing policy parame-
terizations. We list hyperparameters shared by all methods first, and then method-specific ones.