Precise Length Control in Large Language Models

Bradley Butcher, Michael O’Keefe1, James Titchener1,∗

arXiv:2412.11937v1 [cs.CL] 16 Dec 2024

1Strategic Research Group, Raytheon UK

Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used in production
systems, powering applications such as chatbots, summarization, and
question answering. Despite their success, controlling the length of their
response remains a significant challenge, particularly for tasks requiring
structured outputs or specific levels of detail. In this work, we propose
a method to adapt pre-trained decoder-only LLMs for precise control of
response length. Our approach incorporates a secondary length-difference
positional encoding (LDPE) into the input embeddings, which counts
down to a user-set response termination length. Fine-tuning with LDPE
allows the model to learn to terminate responses coherently at the desired
length, achieving mean token errors of less than 3 tokens. We also intro-
duce Max New Tokens++, an extension that enables flexible upper-bound
length control, rather than an exact target. Experimental results on tasks
such as question answering and document summarization demonstrate
that our method enables precise length control without compromising re-
sponse quality.

1
Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have become essential compo-
nents of various production systems, revolutionising the way we interact with
technology. From chatbots like ChatGPT to applications in document summari-
sation, question answering, and content rewriting, LLMs have demonstrated re-
markable capabilities in understanding and generating human-like text [4, 3].
These models, trained on vast amounts of data, have the potential to transform
industries and enhance user experiences across a wide range of domains.
However, despite their impressive performance, LLMs often generate un-
predictable length responses even when prompted with specific instructions for
how long the response should be.
This is particularly problematic in tasks
that require structured outputs, or varying levels of detail, such as document

∗Corresponding author:

1

summarisation [5]. In situations where concise summaries are needed, an LLM
might generate overly lengthy responses, while in cases where more comprehen-
sive summaries are desired, the model might produce insufficient detail. This
lack of control over response length limits the practical applicability of LLMs in
real-world scenarios.
To address this limitation, we present a novel method to fine-tune pre-trained
LLMs to enable precise control of response length. Our approach adapts the
length-difference positional encoding (LDPE) proposed by [27] to decoder-only
transformer architectures. This is achieved by incorporating a countdown mech-
anism that starts from a predetermined response length. During the training
process the model considers this countdown as a signal and implicitly learns
the concept of “token budget”, i.e. how many tokens are remaining to generate
an appropriate response. A user-specified token budget can then be provided
at inference time, thereby facilitating the generation of responses with specified
lengths for downstream tasks.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows:

1. We adapt LDPE for length control in decoder-only LLMs and investigate
the optimal way to add the encodings to a question response pair.

2. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments on
various tasks, including question answering and document summarisation.

3. Our results demonstrate precise control of response length without re-
duction in response quality, enhancing the flexibility and applicability of
LLMs in real-world scenarios.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 provides
an overview of related work in the field of LLMs and output length control.
Section 3 describes our methodology, explaining how we fine-tune LLMs with
an additional positional encoding to provide a countdown mechanism. Section 4
details our experimental setup and the tasks used for evaluation.
Section 5
presents and discusses the results obtained from our experiments. Section 6
concludes the paper and outlines potential future directions for research. Finally,
Section 7 details some of the limitations of the work which could be addressed
to improve the method.

2
Related Work

Positional encoding is used to directly provide transformers with information
about the absolute or relative position of each token [28, 25]. Multiple tech-
niques have been proposed to augment the standard positional encoding with a
secondary encoding containing useful positional information. For example using
a secondary encoding to align digit positions of operands has been shown to pro-
vide greatly improved numerical calculation capabilities [19]. More generally, an
additional learned context dependent encoding allows models to perform a va-
riety of tasks requiring different levels of positional understanding [7]. Here we

2

explore adding a secondary positional encoding scheme to allow direct control
over the response length.
Previous approaches for length control in text generation have primarily
focused on encoder-decoder models for tasks like summarisation. For instance,
[13] proposed methods to initialise the LSTM cell of the decoder with a learnable
vector based on the desired length (LenInit) or input an embedding representing
the remaining length at each decoding step (LenEmb). This work was extended
in [30] (LenAtten) to separate the length information from the decoder hidden
states to better exploit the remaining length information. In [17] a length aware
attention mechanism is used to modifiy the attention matrix based on the length-
budget dynamically during the decoding process. Most relevant to our work,
[27] introduced length-difference positional encoding (LDPE), which modifies
the sinusoidal positional encoding in encoder-decoder transformer models to
give information about the remaining length to the end of the text.
While effective for custom encoder-decoder architectures, these methods are
not compatible with the large pre-trained decoder-only LLMs that have become
prevalent in recent years. Decoder-only LLMs like GPT-3 [3] do not have an ex-
plicit length input during generation, making length control more challenging.
It has been shown that the response length is important for human evalua-
tion scores, and early work suggested controlling the response length by simply
restricting the generation of the end-of-text token until a predefined response
length was met [23]. However, this provides only coarse-grained control and
may lead to unnatural responses.
Prompt-based fine-tuning is the most common method used to control the
response length in LLMs [32, 16]. For example [8] prompts GPT-3 to summarise
articles in a given number of sentences. In [12] reinforcement learning is used
to fine-tune decoder-only LLMs using a rule-based reward model.
The type
of prompt (more than, less than, equal to, between) determines the reward
function, which is calculated using the target and output length.
Although
these methods are applicable to pre-trained decoder-only LLMs and provide
some high level control over the response length, they do not provide precise
control of the response length down to the word or token level. In this work
we demonstrate a simple method to achieve precise token level control of the
response length that can be applied directly to pre-trained LLMs.

3
Method

In this section, we describe our proposed method for controlling the output
length of LLMs by adapting the length-difference positional encoding (LDPE)
proposed by [27] to the decoder-only transformer architecture.
Our approach consists of two main components: (1) fine-tuning pre-trained
LLMs with an added encoding counting down to the response termination point,
and (2) applying the reverse encoding during inference to control the length of
the generated response.

3

3.1
Adding Reverse Positional Encodings to SoTA LLMs

In the transformer architecture [28], positional encodings are used to provide
information about the position of each token in the input sequence. The LDPE
scheme, as introduced by [27], essentially reverses these encodings to show the
model the remaining distance to the end of the generated sequence. In this
paper we demonstrate an effective way to integrate a similar length control
scheme into current state-of-the-art decoder-only LLMs.
Current open source transformer models have typically undergone extensive
pre-training using rotary positional embeddings (RoPE) to provide positional
information [26]. Because of this it would likely be detrimental to the model’s
performance to modify the RoPE to apply length control via LDPE. Thus in or-
der to avoid interfering with the RoPE, we apply LDPE by adding an additional
absolute positional encoding to the input token embeddings.
An additional consideration when applying LDPE to decoder-only models
is that, because they process both the user’s prompt and the model’s response
as a continuous sequence without distinct encoding and decoding stages, they
lack a clear separation between the two. This introduces some ambiguity about
whether the reverse encodings should start at the beginning of the prompt,
or only to the beginning of the models response. We investigate applying the
LDPE encoding to the entire prompt-response pair, and also only applying it
to the models response. We refer to the former simply as LDPE, and the latter
as offset reverse positional encoding (ORPE), since the encoding is effectively
offset by the prompt length (see Fig. 1).

Figure 1:
A simplified diagram of the reverse positional encoding methods
applied a target response length of 100 tokens and a question length of 5 tokens
(L = 105 and n = 5). For LDPE a positional encoding of PE(iLDPE, k) is added
to each token embedding. For ORPE no encoding is added to the prompt part
of the text, then a encoding countdown from iORPE = L −n to iORPE = 1 is
added to the response.

To represent the reverse positional encodings in the embedding space of a
LLM we use the standard sinusoidal encodings [27, 28]:

PE(i, 2k) = sin

i


,
(1)

10000
2k

d

PE(i, 2k + 1) = cos

i


.
(2)

10000
2k

d

4

Here i represents the tokens position in the sequence, k is the index within the
embedding dimension, and d is the total number of dimensions in the embedding
space.
In order to utilise the LDPE we adjust the order that the positional encodings
are used by reversing them to count down towards i = 1. Additionally for the
case of Offset Reverse Positional Encoding (ORPE) we introduce an offset so
that no encoding is applied to the prompt, and the countdown starts from the
end of the input prompt.
Formally, let (X, Y ) = x1, . . . , xn, yn+1, . . . yL be a sequence of tokens con-
sisting of a prompt and response, where n is the prompt length and L is the
total length of the prompt response pair. For LDPE we augment the ith token
embedding by adding the corresponding LDPE encoding PE(iLDPE, k), where,
iLDPE = (L + 1) −i.
Similarly, for ORPE we add the encoding PE(iORPE, k), where iORPE =
(L + 1) −i, but no encoding is added to the tokens that make up the prompt
(i.e.
for i ≤n).
By offsetting the start of the reverse positional encoding
to coincide with the beginning of the model’s response, we ensure that the
countdown only applies to the generated text, not the input prompt.
The
arrangement of the reverse positional encodings is demonstrated in Figure 1,
using word-level tokenization for illustrative purposes only.

3.2
Fine-tuning with Reverse Positional Encodings

To incorporate the additional encoding into the LLM, we fine-tune pre-trained
open-source LLMs with the LDPE or ORPE embeddings added to the original
input embeddings.
Given a fine-tuning dataset of prompt-response pairs,

D = (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2), . . . , (Xm, Ym)
(3)

where Xi is the prompt and Yi is the corresponding target response, we
fine-tune the LLM to minimise the following loss function:

|Yi|
X

m
X

L = −

j=1
log P(yi,j|Xi, Ri,<j, yi,<j)
(4)

i=1

where yi,j is the j-th token of the target response Yi, and yi,<j denotes the
tokens preceding yi,j with corresponding LDPE (or ORPE) encodings Ri,<j.
By adding the reverse positional encodings during fine-tuning, the LLM learns
to generate responses of the desired length, as the model can use the countdown
information provided by the encodings.

3.2.1
Adapting Existing LLMs

Directly adding reverse positional encodings to the token embeddings of an off-
the-shelf LLM may not yield optimal results due to differences in scale between

5

the learned embeddings and the positional encodings. To address this, we in-
troduce a scaling term that balances the magnitude of ORPE with the token
embeddings. Let E = e1, e2, . . . , en be the token embeddings of the input se-
quence X. We compute the scaled embeddings for both LDPE and ORPE (R′)
as follows:

R′ = R · |E|F

|R|F
(5)

where |E|F and |R|F denote the Frobenius norm of the token embeddings and
the reverse positional embeddings, respectively. By scaling the reverse positional
embeddings with the ratio of the Frobenius norms, we ensure that they have
a similar magnitude to the token embeddings, allowing the LLM to effectively
incorporate the length control signal during fine-tuning and inference.
The final input to the LLM, ˆE, is computed by adding the scaled reverse
positional embeddings to the token embeddings:

ˆE = E + R′
(6)

This adaptation allows existing LLMs to benefit from the length-controlling
properties of reverse positional embeddings without requiring significant modi-
fications to the model architecture.

3.3
Inference with Length Control

At inference time, we control the length of the generated response by providing
the a reverse positional embedding that counts down to the target length. Given
a prompt X and a desired response length L, we generate the reverse positional
encoding R and normalize it according to Equation 5 before adding R to the
token embeddings. The LLM then generates the response token by token, condi-
tioning on the prompt, R, and the previously generated tokens. The generation
process continues until an end-of-sequence token is generated, which given the
fine-tuning process should be approximately around the target length. By ma-
nipulating the reverse positional embeddings termination length, we can control
the length of the generated response, enabling the LLM to produce concise or
verbose answers as required by the application.

3.4
Max New Tokens++

While generating responses with exact lengths can be useful in certain applica-
tions, there are scenarios where specifying upper-bound on the desired length is
more appropriate. The widely-used transformers library [29] achieves this simply
by stopping generation once the sequence exceeds the user specified maximum
length. However, this approach does not provide the model with an awareness
of its remaining “token budget” during the generation process, which may lead
to suboptimal response quality.
To address this limitation, we propose a content-aware length control method
that allows the model to learn to terminate the response at or before a user

6

set maximum response length. During fine-tuning with the LDPE (or ORPE)
reverse encodings, we introduce a random increase in the length of the LDPE
sequence. This has the effect of exposing the model to training samples where
the ground truth text terminates naturally before the final token of the LDPE.
The random increase in length is sampled from a half-normal distribution. The
long tail of the half-normal distribution is truncated to a user set maximum
shift.
The random positive shift is added to the position index of reverse posi-
tional encoding. Thus the ith encoding is given by PE(ishift, k), where ishift is
determined randomly for each training sample according to,

ishift = (L + 1) −i + HalfNormal(σ)
(7)

By exposing the model to various target response lengths for the same in-
put prompt during training, we encourage it to learn to generate coherent and
relevant responses that can be equal to or shorter than the user set response
length. The half-normal distribution is chosen because it has a higher probabil-
ity of yielding small values or the shift, ensuring that the model still observes
the original target lengths more frequently, providing a valuable learning signal.
To further improve the model’s ability to generate responses with varying
lengths, we employ a curriculum learning approach [1] by gradually increasing
the scale parameter σ of the half-normal distribution throughout the training
process. Initially, σ is set to a small value, resulting in shifts that are close
to zero. This encourages the model to focus on learning to generate responses
that closely match the true response length. As training progresses, σ is slowly
increased according to an exponential schedule:

σt = σ0 exp
t

T log
σmax


(8)

σ0

where σ0 and σmax are the initial and maximum values of σ, respectively, t is
the current training step, and T is the total number of training steps.
The
values of σ0 and σmax are treated as hyperparameters and can be tuned to
control the level of length variability and the trade-off between conciseness and
informativeness.
Our updated Max New Tokens++ method offers a principled approach to
generating responses with a desired maximum length while allowing the model to
learn when to terminate the response based on the input prompt and generated
content. This enables the model to produce more concise and relevant responses
compared to the naive generation stopping criterion, enhancing the flexibility
and applicability of language models in real-world scenarios.

4
Experimental Setup

This section provides an overview of the models, data and hyperparameters used
to evaluate the performance of the LDPE and ORPE methods. For brevity, in

7

the following section, only the LDPE results will be shown and discussed, and
the corresponding ORPE results can be found in the Appendix.

Data
A combination of the OpenOrca [15] and MMLU [9] datasets was used
for training.
A training set of 110,000 samples was constructed by combin-
ing 100,000 OpenOrca samples with 10,000 MMLU samples (from across all
topics). These datasets were combined to cover a wider range of topics and
sequence lengths, and to utilise both human and synthetically generated data.
An evaluation set of 200 samples was constructed in the same manner, taking
100 samples from each dataset. All training and evaluation data was in English,
including the datasets and benchmarks discussed in Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3.

Models
Experiments were performed by fine-tuning both Mistral 7B [11] and
Llama3 8B [20]. These models were chosen as they are exemplary represen-
tations of modern LLMs with robust architectures and significant parameter
counts, whilst still being small enough to train on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000
GPU. The instruct versions of both models were used, and their forward pass
methods were modified to add the appropriate LDPE encodings.

Baseline Models
As a baseline for general model response quality we simply
used the pretrained Mistral 7B Instruct and Llama3 8B Instruct models without
any reverse encoding added. Additionally as a baseline method of length control
we fine-tuned Mistral with the target response length included in the prompt,
for example “Answer the following question in 112 tokens:”.

Hyperparameters
Both models were trained for a single epoch using the en-
tire training dataset and a batch size of 1 with gradient accumulation of 5. All
models were trained using the AdamW optimiser [18] with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99
and ϵ = 1×10−8, with a learning rate of 0.0003 and a linear learning rate sched-
ule. These hyperparameter settings were obtained via manual experimentation
and evaluation until satisfactory results were obtained.

Low Rank Adaptation
Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [10] was employed to
efficiently train all models. LoRA allows for efficient incorporation of the addi-
tional reverse positional encodings without overwriting the pretraining weights.
A rank of 16, an α of 32 and a dropout rate of 0.05 was used to train all models.

5
Results

5.1
Exact Length Control

5.1.1
Q&A

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the method we evaluated its performance on
the OpenOrca dataset. A set of 20 samples were selected and different length

8

responses were generated for each, ranging from 10 to 200 tokens. The generated
responses length was then compared to the target length. This analysis was
performed for three different approaches: prompting without length control,
fine-tuned prompting, and the LDPE method. Figure 2 presents the results of
this comparison. The corresponding ORPE results are similar to LDPE and
can be found in Figure 6 in the Appendix.

Figure 2: Comparison of target and response lengths for different length control
approaches on a question-answering task. The ideal response length is indicated
by the dashed line in each panel.
Top left: results for prompting Mistral
without length control. Top right: results for fine-tuned prompting Mistral.
Bottom left: results for LDPE fine tuned Mistral 7B model. Bottom right:
results for LDPE fine tuned Llama3 8B model.

As shown in the top-left panel of Figure 2, prompting without any length
control results in a wide spread of response lengths, with many responses signif-
icantly deviating from the ideal length. This highlights the need for an effective
length control mechanism in question-answering systems. The top-right panel
of Figure 2 demonstrates the performance of fine-tuned prompting, where the

9

model is fine-tuned with length information.
While this approach improves
the alignment between the target and response lengths compared to prompt-
ing without length control, there is still a noticeable deviation from the ideal
response length for many samples. Note that these two baseline experiments
were performed with Mistral only as we expect the performance to be similar
for Llama.
In contrast, our LDPE length control method, shown in the bottom panels
of Figure 2, achieves a near-perfect alignment between the target and response
lengths. This showcases the effectiveness of the method in controlling the exact
length of the generated responses in a question-answering setting. The ORPE
version of the results shows similar performance, with slightly more outliers.
Some example text responses for a range of target lengths can be seen in Table 1
in the Appendix.

5.1.2
Summarisation

To evaluate the performance of our content-aware length control method, we
generated a dataset of summaries using the CNN/DailyMail dataset [21]. We
selected a subset of 1000 articles from the training split and generated summaries
for each article using five different system prompts, each targeting a specific
summary length or style:

• A one-sentence summary

• A one-paragraph summary

• A long, detailed summary not exceeding the original article length

• A 100-word summary

• A short, concise summary

The summaries were generated using the OpenAI API with the GPT-3.5-
turbo-0125 model [22].
For each combination of article and system prompt,
we recorded the generated summary, its length, and the corresponding system
prompt and article. The resulting dataset was then used to evaluate the sum-
marisation quality of our LDPE fine-tuned models, as well as a baseline Mistral
model that was fine-tuned for prompt based length control. Each model was
prompted to generate a summary of a full article from the CNN/DailyMail
dataset, and the target length of the summary was set to the length of each of
the 5 GPT-3.5 summaries. For the LDPE fine-tuned models the target length
was given to the model only via the LDPE encodings, whereas for the prompt
fine-tuned model the target length as was added to the prompt.
The qual-
ity of the summary was assessed by calculating the BERT scores between the
generated summary and the corresponding GPT-3.5 summary.
Figure 3 presents the mean BERT scores for the summarisation tasks, binned
into different target response length ranges. Additional detailed summarisation
quality results, including ROUGE scores, can be found in Table 1 in the Ap-
pendix.
We compared both the Mistral and Llama models with the LDPE

10

Figure 3:
Results for length the length controlled summarisation task. Mod-
els used are LDPE fine-tuned Mistral and Llama (-LDPE), as well as the
Mistral baseline model fine-tuned for prompted based length control (Mistral-
Prompted). Left: BERT scores between summaries and GPT-3.5 ground truth
summaries. Right: Mean absolute error (MAE) between the number of tokens
in model’s summary and the target number of tokens.

fine-tuning, as well as the baseline Mistral model fine-tuned for length control
via prompting (Mistral-Prompted). The results show that the summary qual-
ity was stable across all three models and for different response lengths. The
average BERT scores across all summaries were 0.698 for Mistral-LDPE, 0.699
for Llama-LDPE, and 0.698 the baseline Mistral-Prompted model. The length
accuracy of the summaries was significantly better for the LDPE fine-tuned
models as shown in Figure 3. The mean length error between the target sum-
mary length and the models summary was 2.8 and 2.4 tokens for Mistral-LDPE
and Llama-LDPE respectively. The mean error for the Mistral-prompted was
an order of magnitude larger at 24.8 tokens. Overall the results suggest that the
models are still capable of generating high-quality summaries after fine-tuning
with LDPE, and have developed the capability for fine-grained length control.

5.1.3
Benchmarking Response Quality

To identify any degradation in the quality of the model’s responses after fine-
tuning, we evaluated the models against a number of standard benchmarks.
We ran all benchmarks using the LM Evaluation Harness [6]. LM Evaluation
Harness evaluates models against common benchmarks using the log-likelihood
of correct or incorrect responses from the model to score the task. The bench-
marks evaluated were the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) [14], Hel-
laSwag [31], PIQA [2], and WINOGRANDE [24].
We found that the LDPE fine-tuned models had an increased reliance on
the instruction tokens used in fine-tuning. Thus instruction tokens were added
into the appropriate places for each evaluation task. Futhermore, for question
answer (QA) style tasks such as ARC and PIQA the LDPE funetuned models
performed poorly unless the LDPE encodings were added to the ‘answer’ part of
the evaluation. Likely the poor results were due to the log-likelihood of correct
or incorrect response being dominated by the additional model perplexity due

11

to the lack of LDPE embeddings. Therefore to evaluate the LDPE fine-tuned
models on QA tasks we modified the LM Evaluation Harness to optionally apply
the LDPE countdown to the queries. Note that this gave the model additional
information about the response length, but no information about whether a
specific question response pair was correct or incorrect.
The results are shown in Figure 4 for the LDPE fine-tuned Mistral and Llama
models (Mistral-LDPE and Llama-LDPE) as well as the base instruct versions
(-base). The results show that the LDPE fine-tuned model’s performance was
generally preserved after fine-tuning, except for a reduction in Mistral’s perfor-
mance on the Hellaswag benchmarks.

Figure 4:
Performance of length controlled and baseline models against a range
of standard benchmarks. All evaluations used zero-shot prompting. The labels
Mistral and Llama correspond to Mistral-7B-Instruct and Llama-3-8B-Instruct
respectively. The tag -LDPE means the model was fine-tuned with the LDPE.
Additionally LDPE were added during the evaluation.

5.2
Max New Tokens++

Figure 5 shows the comparison between the token limit and response length
for a Mistral model fine-tuned using the Max New Tokens++ method with
σ0 = 0.1 and σmax = 2048.
For shorter token limits the responses closely
follow the identity line, while for longer token limits there is a deviation towards
shorter responses. Even though there is a shift in median away from identity
the 95% confidence interval still follows closely. This indicates that the model
still possesses a notion of “token budget”, and that it uses this token budget to
smoothly terminate the longer responses as they approach the token limit.

6
Conclusion

In this work we introduce a method to fine-tune decoder-only LLMs to enable
precise control of the response length. This is achieved by adding an additional
reverse positional encoding to the transformer architecture. This encoding pro-
vides the model with information about how many more tokens should be gen-

12

Figure 5:
Plot of token limit vs response length for using a Max New Tokens++
fine-tuned Mistral model on a question-answering task. This technique has not
been applied to Llama but we expect the performance to be fairly similar based
on the similarity of the earlier results for exact length control.

erated. During fine-tuning, the model learns to use this countdown to structure
its responses to terminate smoothly at the end of the countdown.
We investigated two different methods of applying reverse positional encod-
ings, Length Difference Positional Encoding (LDPE), and Offset Reverse Posi-
tional Encoding (ORPE). The difference between the two methods is the point
in the prompt-response pair at which the reverse encoding begins. LDPE simply
adds the reverse encoding to the entire prompt-response pair, whereas in ORPE
the encoding is offset so that it is only applied to the model’s response. Our
results demonstrate that both LDPE and ORPE effectively control the response
length without degrading the underlying performance of the LLM. There does
not appear to be a significant different in performance between the two methods.
Preliminary work was also presented for the Max New Tokens++ method.
This is a way of implementing an upper bound on the number of generated
tokens rather than an exact target. The results show that this method is effective
at training the model provide responses that terminate smoothly at or before the
token limit is reached. This prevents the generation of needlessly long answers
in an attempt to meet the target length imposed by the LDPE encoding.
Overall, this work shows that the addition of a specialized positional encod-
ing during fine-tuning enables precise control over when the model outputs the

13

end of sentence token, without degrading response quality. While we focused
on controlling the generation of the EOS token to terminate the response on
command, this approach could be generalised to control the generation of other
tokens or potentially influence other aspects of LLM generation.

7
Limitations

We have identified several limitations in our work that could be addressed to
improve the evaluation and effectiveness of the proposed length control method.
Firstly, we fine-tuned our models on relatively small question-answer-focused
datasets. The impact of dataset size and diversity on learning length control
remains unclear. Secondly, our experiments were limited to the instruct versions
of Mistral 7B and Llama3 8B models, both within the 7-8B parameter range and
instruction fine-tuned. While this made them suitable for further fine-tuning
with a QA dataset, it remains an open question how well the proposed length
control techniques generalise to other models.
Another limitation is that the countdown mechanism in our approach is
based on tokens rather than words or characters, the latter of which may be
more relevant for user applications. Future research could explore using LDPE
to count down words or characters instead of tokens. Additionally, incorporating
the relative progress towards the termination length, rather than the absolute
number of remaining tokens, might enhance the model’s ability to generalise
across various response lengths. Finally, we utilised standard sinusoidal posi-
tional encodings in a reverse and offset order throughout this work. These en-
codings, originally designed to provide information about token ordering, might
not be optimal for our specific use case where the focus is on counting down to
a termination point.
Addressing these limitations in future work would provide a more robust
evaluation of the proposed length control method and potentially enhance its
applicability and performance across different models and datasets.

References

[1] Yoshua Bengio, J´erˆome Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston.
Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international con-
ference on machine learning, pages 41–48, 2009.

[2] Yonatan Bisk, Rowan Zellers, Ronan Le Bras, Jianfeng Gao, and Yejin
Choi. PIQA: reasoning about physical commonsense in natural language.
CoRR, abs/1911.11641, 2019.

[3] Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Ka-
plan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.

14

[4] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

[5] Mahak Gambhir and Vishal Gupta. Recent automatic text summarization
techniques: a survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 47(1):1–66, 2017.

[6] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black,
Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain
Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa,
Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang
Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou.
A framework for few-shot language model evaluation, 12 2023.

[7] Olga Golovneva, Tianlu Wang, Jason Weston, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar.
Contextual position encoding: Learning to count what’s important. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.18719, 2024.

[8] Tanya Goyal, Junyi Jessy Li, and Greg Durrett. News summarization and
evaluation in the era of gpt-3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12356, 2022.

[9] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika,
Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language
understanding, 2021.

[10] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi
Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large
language models. CoRR, abs/2106.09685, 2021.

[11] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford,
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna
Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, L´elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
Wang, Timoth´ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023.

[12] Renlong Jie, Xiaojun Meng, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu.
Prompt-based length controlled generation with reinforcement learning.
ArXiv, abs/2308.12030, 2023.

[13] Yuta Kikuchi, Graham Neubig, Ryohei Sasano, Hiroya Takamura, and
Manabu Okumura. Controlling output length in neural encoder-decoders.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1328–1338, 2016.

[14] Chao Lei, Nir Lipovetzky, and Krista A. Ehinger. Generalized planning for
the abstraction and reasoning corpus, 2024.

[15] Wing Lian, Bleys Goodson, Eugene Pentland, Austin Cook, Chanvichet
Vong, and ”Teknium”.
Openorca: An open dataset of gpt augmented
flan reasoning traces.

OpenOrca, 2023.

15

[16] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi,
and Graham Neubig. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey
of prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM Computing
Surveys, 55:1 – 35, 2021.

[17] Yizhu Liu, Qi Jia, and Kenny Zhu. Length control in abstractive summa-
rization by pretraining information selection. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 6885–6895, 2022.

[18] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization,
2019.

[19] Sean McLeish, Arpit Bansal, Alex Stein, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer,
Brian R Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura, Abhinav Bhatele, Jonas Geiping,
Avi Schwarzschild, et al. Transformers can do arithmetic with the right
embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17399, 2024.

[20] Meta. Introducing Meta Llama 3: The most capable openly available LLM
to date — ai.meta.com.

2024. [Accessed 13-05-2024].

[21] Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Cicero Nogueira dos santos, Caglar Gul-
cehre, and Bing Xiang. Abstractive text summarization using sequence-to-
sequence rnns and beyond, 2016.

[22] OpenAI. GPT3.5 Turbo-0125, 2024.

[23] Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju, Mary Williamson,
Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle Ott, Kurt Shuster, Eric Michael Smith,
et al.
Recipes for building an open-domain chatbot.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.13637, 2021.

[24] Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin
Choi. WINOGRANDE: an adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale.
CoRR, abs/1907.10641, 2019.

[25] Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Ashish Vaswani.
Self-attention with
relative position representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02155, 2018.

[26] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng
Liu.
Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding.
Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.

[27] Sho Takase and Naoaki Okazaki. Positional encoding to control output se-
quence length. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 3999–
4004, 2019.

16

[28] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 5998–
6008, 2017.

[29] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement
Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R´emi Louf, Morgan
Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural lan-
guage processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.

[30] Zhongyi Yu, Zhenghao Wu, Hao Zheng, Zhe XuanYuan, Jefferson Fong,
and Weifeng Su. Lenatten: An effective length controlling unit for text
summarization. CoRR, abs/2106.00316, 2021.

[31] Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin
Choi.
Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence?
CoRR,
abs/1905.07830, 2019.

[32] Yubo Zhang, Xingxing Zhang, Xun Wang, Si-Qing Chen, and Furu Wei.
Latent prompt tuning for text summarization.
ArXiv, abs/2211.01837,
2022.

17

Appendix A
Example length controlled outputs

Examples of length controlled outputs from the LDPE finetuned Llama model
are shown in Table. 1. For the same prompt, the model is asked to generate
responses of varied length. This results in controlled levels of detail, while still
answering the question correctly.

18

Question

Extract the answer to the question from the following context. Question: What’s the expensive
rock mean Context: Buddhist schools vary on the exact nature of the path to liberation, the
importance and canonicity of various teachings and scriptures, and especially their respective
practices. Buddhism denies a creator deity and posits that mundane deities such as Mahabrahma
are misperceived to be a creator. The foundations of Buddhist tradition and practice are the
Three Jewels: the Buddha, the Dharma (the teachings), and the Sangha (the community).
Taking ””refuge in the triple gem”” has traditionally been a declaration and commitment to
being on the Buddhist path, and in general distinguishes a Buddhist from a non-Buddhist. Other
practices are Ten Meritorious Deeds including, giving charity to reduce the greediness; following
ethical precepts; renouncing conventional living and becoming a monastic; the development of
mindfulness and practice of meditation; cultivation of higher wisdom and discernment; study
of scriptures; devotional practices; ceremonies; and in the Mahayana tradition, invocation of
buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Responses
Target
length

Response
length

10
12

There is no answer.

90
89

The context does not provide an answer to the question ””What’s the expen-
sive rock mean?”” The context is about Buddhist schools and their practices,
and it does not mention anything about an expensive rock. Therefore, it is
not possible to extract an answer to the question from the given context. The
question seems to be unrelated to the context and requires a separate answer
or information that is not provided in the given context.

150
149

The context does not provide an answer to the question ””What’s the expen-
sive rock mean?”” The context is about Buddhist schools and their practices,
including the Three Jewels, Ten Meritorious Deeds, and other practices. It
also mentions the denial of a creator deity and the importance of scriptures
and teachings in different Buddhist schools. However, there is no mention of
an ””expensive rock”” in the context. Therefore, it is not possible to extract
an answer to the question from the given context. The question seems to be
unrelated to the context and requires a separate answer or information that is
not provided in the given context.

200
197

The context provided does not directly answer the question about the expen-
sive rock. However, it does provide information about the nature of the path to
liberation, the importance and canonicity of various teachings and scriptures,
and especially their respective practices in Buddhist schools. The context also
mentions the Three Jewels, which are the Buddha, the Dharma (the teach-
ings), and the Sangha (the community). Taking ””refuge in the triple gem””
has traditionally been a declaration and commitment to being on the Buddhist
path, and in general distinguishes a Buddhist from a non-Buddhist. There-
fore, the answer to the question about the expensive rock is not provided in
the given context. It is important to note that the context provided is about
Buddhist schools and their practices, and it does not mention anything about
an expensive rock. If you have any further questions or if you would like to
know more about Buddhist schools and their practices, feel free to ask.

Table 1:
Example generated responses using ORPE fine tuned Llama3 8B.
Note that special tokens, instruction tokens and linebreaks have been removed
from the text but not from the token count.

19

Appendix B
Summarization quality

As explained in Section 5.1.2, the summarization quality of the LDPE fine-
tuned models was evaluated against 1000 articles from the CNN/DailyMail
dataset [21]. The similarity of the summaries generated by the length controlled
finetuned models were compared to summaries generated using the OpenAI
API with the GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 model [22]. In table 2 the full results of this
comparison are shown, including F1 ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and ROUGE-Lsum
scores for each model and summary length range.

Model
Target length
(tokens)
BERT
score
R-1
R-2
R-Lsum

0 to 100
0.715
0.522
0.304
0.420
100 to 200
0.690
0.497
0.231
0.331
200 to 300
0.713
0.554
0.264
0.380
300 to 400
0.695
0.544
0.242
0.403
400 to 500
0.680
0.531
0.230
0.403

Llama-LDPE

0 to 100
0.712
0.516
0.303
0.416
100 to 200
0.692
0.501
0.232
0.330
200 to 300
0.701
0.530
0.248
0.351
300 to 400
0.696
0.531
0.233
0.388
400 to 500
0.690
0.537
0.238
0.405

Mistral-LDPE

0 to 100
0.714
0.513
0.301
0.415
100 to 200
0.690
0.497
0.230
0.328
200 to 300
0.706
0.540
0.260
0.362
300 to 400
0.696
0.530
0.233
0.380
400 to 500
0.686
0.522
0.233
0.398

Mistral-Prompted

Table 2: BERT and ROUGE F1 scores between length-controlled model sum-
maries and the GPT-3.5-turbo-0125 model [22]. Models used are LDPE fine-
tuned Mistral and Llama (-LDPE), as well as the Mistral baseline model fine-
tuned for prompt based length control (Mistral-Prompted).

20

Appendix C
Offset reverse positional encoding
(ORPE) results

We investigated the effect of offseting the reverse positional encodings so that
no encoding was applied to the prompt. The logic being that in length con-
trol information should only be needed in the models response, and not in the
prompt. This is shown diagramatically by the iORPE row in Fig 1.
The results of the QA length control experiment for models fine-tuned with
the ORPE version of the reverse encoding are shown in Fig. 6. For this experi-
ment the same data and method was used as described in Sec. 5.1.1. The results
show effective length control, but ultimately no improvement over the slightly
more straightforward LDPE technique.

Figure 6: Comparison of target and response lengths for different length control
approaches on a question-answering task. The ideal response length is indicated
by the dashed line in each panel. Left: results for ORPE fine-tuned Mistral 7B
model. Right: results for ORPE fine-tuned Llama3 8B model.

21