Low-Rank Contextual Reinforcement Learning from
Heterogeneous Human Feedback

Seong Jin Lee∗
Will Wei Sun†
Yufeng Liu‡

arXiv:2412.19436v2 [stat.ML] 4 Mar 2026

Abstract

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has become a cornerstone

for aligning large language models with human preferences. However, the heterogene-

ity of human feedback, driven by diverse individual contexts and preferences, poses

significant challenges for reward learning.
To address this, we propose a Low-rank

Contextual RLHF (LoCo-RLHF) framework that integrates contextual information to

better model heterogeneous feedback while maintaining computational efficiency. Our

approach builds on a contextual preference model, leveraging the intrinsic low-rank

structure of the interaction between user contexts and query-answer pairs to mitigate

the high dimensionality of feature representations. Furthermore, we address the chal-

lenge of distributional shifts in feedback through our Pessimism in Reduced Subspace

(PRS) policy, inspired by pessimistic offline reinforcement learning techniques.
We

theoretically demonstrate that our policy achieves a tighter sub-optimality gap com-

pared to existing methods. Extensive experiments, ranging from synthetic simulations

to an analysis of the real-world PersonalLLM benchmark, validate the effectiveness of

LoCo-RLHF and demonstrate its superior performance in personalized settings.

Keywords— Distribution Shift, Large Language Models, Low-rankness, Offline Reinforcement

Learning

∗Ph.D. student, Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill. Email:
†Associate Professor, Daniels School of Business, Purdue University. Email:
‡Professor, Department of Statistics and Operations Research, Department of Genetics, Department of
Biostatistics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Email:

1

1
Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a popular framework where an agent learns to optimize a policy

that maximizes the expected rewards, reflecting the success of completing a task. In standard RL,

the reward function plays a critical role in guiding the agent’s behavior. When a reward function

is well-defined, RL can effectively solve problems (Mnih et al., 2015, 2016; Silver et al., 2016).

However, in many real-world applications, designing or observing an appropriate reward function

can be a significant challenge. For instance, consider the problem of designing a reward model

for a self-driving car. One might construct a heuristic reward structure, assigning a +1 reward

for every mile traveled to encourage forward movement and a −10 penalty for traffic violations

to promote safety. While this approach might seem straightforward, it can lead to unintended

consequences. The car may prioritize speed over adherence to traffic regulations, misaligning with

human safety preferences. Conversely, excessive penalties for traffic violations could result in the

car avoiding movement altogether, merely to minimize penalties, disregarding its primary objective

of safe driving. Such scenarios illustrate how traditional RL, dependent on fixed reward structures,

often fails to capture the nuanced, human-aligned goals that are critical in complex environments

such as autonomous driving (Sallab et al., 2017; Kiran et al., 2021).

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) overcomes this issue by incorporating

human input into the learning process (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022).

Unlike standard RL, where agents learn from predefined reward functions, RLHF uses human

feedback to train a reward model that reflects human preferences for state-action pairs. RLHF is

often referred to as preference-based reinforcement learning (Zhan et al., 2023) because it enables

agents to learn from non-numerical feedback, which is more natural in many real-world settings.

For example, when evaluating responses to a question, humans typically find it easier to compare

answers and determine which is better, rather than assigning precise numerical scores. To capture

these preferences, models like the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley and Terry, 1952) are

2

employed. The BTL model assumes that internal preferences influence action choices, with the

probability of selecting one action over another being proportional to its preference. Explicitly, the

probability of choosing action a1 over a0 is given by:

P(a1 > a0) =
exp(r(s, a1))
exp(r(s, a1)) + exp(r(s, a0)),

where r(s, a) represents the preference of action a in state s. By learning these preferences, RLHF

uses them as rewards to train policies that maximize the learned reward, aligning agent behavior

more closely with human preferences. This is especially valuable in complex domains like LLMs,

where traditional reward functions are difficult to design. After training a supervised model on

large-scale text data, RLHF fine-tunes the model using human-derived reward signals to better

align it with human preferences.
This approach has been crucial in advancing large language

models (LLMs) such as InstructGPT, ChatGPT and Llama (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al.,

2023; Touvron et al., 2023).

Despite its successes, the existing RLHF framework faces notable challenges (Casper et al.,

2023). As the reward model is a function of the query-answer pair, it assumes that all individuals

share a single preference function. In practice, however, individuals exhibit diverse characteristics,

leading to heterogenous preferences (Zhong et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024). The heterogeneity in

human preferences can lead to three types of challenges. The first challenge is the personalization

problem. For instance, consider a model tasked with answering the question, “What is a star?”.

The model could offer a detailed scientific explanation, such as “A star is a massive, luminous

sphere of plasma held together by its own gravity,” or a simpler response like “A star is a giant

glowing ball in the sky, like the Sun.” While a scientifically inclined user might favor the former,

a five-year-old child is more likely to prefer the latter for its simplicity and interpretability (See

Figure 1). This example illustrates the benefits of development of personalized models that adapt

to user contexts, highlighting the potential of contextual RLHF to address these diverse needs.

The second challenge is the distribution shift between the offline training data and the target

3

Figure 1: Illustration of personalization in RLHF.

deployment distribution. For example, consider a scenario where offline feedback data are predom-

inantly collected from college students, but the model is intended for deployment among preschool

children as illustrated in Figure 2. As the model is trained on the offline dataset via empirical

risk minimization, the estimated homogeneous model will lead to optimize its performance on the

college students, which could perform poorly with children. In such cases, accounting for user-

specific features becomes essential to effectively bridge the gap between the training and target

distributions, ensuring the model performs well even on different populations.

The last challenge is the high dimensionality of contexts in RLHF problems.
In LLMs,

reward models are typically trained using features extracted from the final layer of a pre-trained

supervised model. For instance, GPT-3 (175B) (Brown, 2020) has 12,288 units in its last layer,

while InstructGPT, which employs a 6B reward model (RM), has 4,096 units in its last layer

(Ouyang et al., 2022). Additionally, Ouyang et al. (2022) includes contextual information about

labelers (human experts), such as demographic attributes (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, nationality,

education level) and survey-based details. Including both user contexts and state-action features in

the model leads to a rapidly expanding parameter space, driven by the high-dimensional interaction

terms. This growth poses substantial computational challenges for efficient parameter estimation.

4

Figure 2: Illustration of distribution shift in RLHF.

In this paper, we introduce a Low-rank Contextual RLHF (LoCo-RLHF) framework to address

these challenges. Advances in digital platforms have enabled the collection of rich and diverse user

data, which can be leveraged to develop individualized preference models. Instead of modeling

user preferences as a homogeneous function of state-action pairs r(s, a) for state s and action a, we

consider heterogeneous preference r(x, s, a), where x represents individual context. Specifically, the

homogeneous feedback model considers r(s, a) = θ⊤ϕ(s, a) for the pre-trained embedded feature

ϕ(s, a) ∈Rdϕ and some unknown vector parameter θ. To allow heterogeneity induced from individ-

ual contexts, we adopt the bilinear form r(x, s, a) = x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a), where x ∈Rdx and Θ∗∈Rdx×dϕ is

a unknown matrix parameter. This formulation captures heterogeneity in preference by accounting

for individual contexts. To address the high dimensionality, we leverage the low-rank structure of

the parameter matrix. Low-rank approximations have been successfully applied in various domains,

including contextual bandits (Jun et al., 2019; Kang et al., 2022) and LLMs (Li et al., 2018; Agha-

janyan et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2024; Sidahmed et al., 2024).

In this approach, high-dimensional features are projected into a low-dimensional latent space. For

example, in the context of a query about a star, state-action features might include an embedding

representing the complexity of the explanation, while user context features (e.g., age, education

5

level) could capture preferences for simpler or more detailed responses. The interaction between

these features and contexts is then modeled using a reduced set of latent factors. Motivated from

this, we impose a low-rank structure on the matrix parameter Θ as shown in Figure 3 and hence

substantially reduce the computation complexity from dxdϕ to (dx+dϕ)r, where r is the rank of the

matrix. Details of the contextual preference model is given in Section 2.1. By imposing a low-rank

structure, we effectively reduce the dimensionality of the parameter space, preserving the essential

interactions while minimizing estimation errors and computational costs.

Figure 3: Illustration of the Low-rank Contextual Preference Model.

We then design a Pessimism on Reduced Space (PRS) algorithm to solve this LoCo-RLHF prob-

lem. The PRS algorithm has the following three key components: estimating the low-rank subspace,

constructing confidence bounds and pessimistic values, and deriving the pessimistic policy.

1. Estimating the low-rank subspace. In the first stage, we leverage the low-rank structure

of the parameter matrix to estimate a low-dimensional subspace using a rank-constrained

maximum likelihood estimator. Since this optimization problem is inherently non-convex, we

employ factored gradient descent (also known as alternating gradient descent) via the Burer-

Monteiro formulation (Burer and Monteiro, 2003; Zheng and Lafferty, 2016). Once the matrix

is estimated, we perform singular value decomposition (SVD) to extract orthogonal matrices

6

that define the subspace. These matrices allow us to embed features and contexts into a

reduced-dimensional space, thereby reducing the problem’s overall complexity.

2. Constructing confidence bounds. With the reduced subspace established, the next step

involves projecting the original problem into the low-dimensional space and constructing

confidence bounds within this representation.
Subspace estimation inherently introduces

uncertainty when projecting to the reduced rank. To address this, we develop a novel ana-

lytical framework that incorporates the uncertainty quantification into the confidence bound

construction, ensuring robustness in subsequent stages.

3. Deriving the pessimistic policy. Finally, we adopt a pessimistic approach, widely used

in offline RL literature (Jin et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024),

to account for uncertainties in reward estimation.
By optimizing the pessimistic reward,

constructed to account for worst-case scenarios, we derive a robust policy that balances

exploration and exploitation, even in the presence of distribution shift.

In theory, we provide theoretical guarantees for our algorithm by deriving upper bounds on the

sub-optimality gap. The sub-optimality gap is defined as the difference between the optimal reward,

achieved with complete knowledge of the true parameters, and the reward of the policy derived by

our algorithm. Specifically, we establish that the sub-optimality gap of our PRS policy is bounded

as O
q

n

with probability at least 1 −δ (Theorem 2). In low-rank settings where

(dx+dϕ)·r+log(1/δ)

r ≪min{dx, dϕ}, our bound represents a significant improvement over the O
q

n


dxdϕ+log(1/δ)

bound achieved by existing methods (Zhu et al., 2023). Furthermore, in the special case of our

LoCo-RLHF framework where human feedback follows a pre-defined group structure, the derived

bound aligns with the results of Zhong et al. (2024), demonstrating the tightness of our analysis.

The sub-optimality gap analysis of our policy presents several challenges.
First the rank-

constrained maximum likelihood estimation problem is inherently non-convex, which precludes the

direct application of classical results from convex optimization literature. Moreover, the offline

7

dataset comprises binary pairwise responses from human experts, rather than direct quantitative

data. This characteristic complicates the derivation of the estimation bounds, as it requires handling

the discrete nature of the data. During the uncertainty quantification step, both the estimation

error of the subspace and the likelihood estimation contribute to the overall uncertainty of the

parameter estimate in the reduced space. Lastly, the approximation of the preference function

in the reduced space is similarly influenced by the subspace estimation error, which propagates

through the analysis and affects the policy’s value. To address these challenges, we develop novel

tools that incorporate subspace estimation error into the construction of estimation bounds and

the approximation of the preference function.

Finally, we present extensive numerical experiments with varying rank, dimensionality, and

offline data distributions to evaluate the proposed PRS policy, comparing it with the greedy policy

and the pessimistic policy derived from the unconstrained MLE of Zhu et al. (2023). Furthermore,

we conduct a systematic investigation into rank selection and perform sensitivity analyses on the

confidence bound parameter and data split selection, with detailed results and discussions included

in the Appendix. In addition to simulations, we apply our method to the PersonalLLM benchmark,

a large-scale real-world dataset for preference-based RLHF with heterogeneous reward models. On

both synthetic and real data, the PRS policy consistently achieves smaller sub-optimality gaps

than existing methods, with particularly strong gains in low-rank and high-dimensional regimes.

Moreover, experiments with artificially augmented noisy features demonstrate that PRS remains

stable while baseline methods deteriorate, highlighting the robustness of our approach in realistic

preference-learning settings.

1.1
Related Work

Our work is closely related to, yet distinct from, recent studies on RLHF with heterogeneous

experts and low-rank LLMs.

• RLHF with Heterogeneous Experts: The incorporation of human feedback into the RL

8

framework, introduced by Christiano et al. (2017), has gained significant attention in recent

years. Recent studies, such as Ouyang et al. (2022) and Bai et al. (2022), highlight that

experts may disagree on optimal responses, and biases in offline datasets can disadvantage

underrepresented groups (Prabhakaran et al., 2021; Feffer et al., 2023; Kirk et al., 2023).

To address the heterogeneity of human preferences, various approaches have been proposed.

One common method is to impose a group structure on individuals and train separate reward

models for each group, as seen in Park et al. (2024), and Ramesh et al. (2024). These models

are then aggregated using techniques such as social welfare functions, Pareto-optimal solu-

tions (Boldi et al., 2024), or robust optimization (Chakraborty et al., 2024). Another line of

research focuses on personalized models tailored to individual preferences (Jang et al., 2023;

Kirk et al., 2023; Poddar et al., 2024). However, most of these approaches lack theoretical

guarantees for their performance. The most closely related work is Zhong et al. (2024), which

proposes a multi-party RLHF framework that models and aggregates preferences across mul-

tiple individuals. While their method addresses heterogeneity through a pre-defined grouping

structure, it requires a predetermined clustering of individual preferences and does not fully

account for individual-specific contextual information. In contrast, our work extends this

research by introducing a low-rank contextual preference model that incorporates expert

characteristics and learns the latent low-rank representation of the reward model.

• Low-rank LLMs: To improve LLM performance, many models leverage high-dimensional

parameter spaces (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). As dimensionality increases, low-

rank approximations have been proposed for fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2023;

Dettmers et al., 2024), supported by evidence of intrinsic low-dimensional structures within

high-dimensional spaces (Aghajanyan et al., 2020; Sidahmed et al., 2024). These models

primarily focus on low-rank adoption during pre-training or fine-tuning. In contrast, our

work addresses the heterogeneity of human feedback in the reward learning step of RLHF.

Additionally, drawing from statistical theory on high-dimensional problems (Wainwright,

9

2019), we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis. While low-rank structures have been studied

in bandit and RL problems (Jun et al., 2019; Kang et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2023; Stojanovic

et al., 2024; Duan et al., 2024), their application in RLHF remains underexplored.

• Uncertainty Quantification and Statistical Inference: Our reward modeling approach

is also connected to the literature on uncertainty quantification for low-rank structures and

ranking. Foundational works by Chen et al. (2019) and Chen et al. (2021) established frame-

works for inference and UQ in noisy matrix completion and robust PCA. Furthermore, our

contextual BTL model aligns with recent studies on covariate-assisted ranking and MLE-

based UQ, which also consider potential model misspecifications (Fan et al., 2024b,a). While

these existing works primarily focus on asymptotic confidence sets and statistical inference,

our work provides a non-asymptotic analysis. This is essential for the offline RL setting,

where finite-sample guarantees are required to establish the sub-optimality gap of the result-

ing policy.

In summary, our work presents the first provable low-rank contextual RLHF framework that

tackles personalization, distribution shift, and high-dimensionality in heterogeneous human prefer-

ences.

1.2
Notations

We introduce the notations used throughout the paper. Let [n] denote the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. The

Frobenius norm of a matrix is denoted by ∥· ∥F , and the matrix-induced norm ∥v∥W =
√

v⊤Wv

is denoted by ∥· ∥W . The ball induced by the Frobenius norm, centered at Θ0 with radius r is

denoted by B(Θ0, r) := {Θ : ∥Θ −Θ0∥F ≤r}. For a vector v, (v)i represents its i-th component.

We write Σ1 ≻Σ2 if Σ1 −Σ2 is positive definite. Denote Kronecker product of two matrices as ⊗.

10

2
Problem Formulation

In this section, we formally define the LoCo-RLHF problem within the framework of pairwise

comparison feedback. Specifically, we (i) introduce the contextual preference model, which captures

the heterogeneous preferences of individuals, and (ii) demonstrate how the contextual reward model

addresses both the personalization and distribution shift challenges.

2.1
Contextual Preference Model

To address the heterogeneity in human preferences regarding queries and their corresponding

answers, we introduce the contextual preference model. Let S denote the state (query) space,

A the action (answer) space, and X the context space. For t ∈[N], a human expert with context

xt ∈X is presented with a state st ∈S and two actions, at0, at1 ∈A. The expert selects the

preferred action, where yt = 1 indicates a preference for at1 over at0, and yt = 0 indicates a

preference for at0. The offline dataset comprises a collection of (i) contexts, (ii) states, (iii) action

pairs, and (iv) expert preferences, represented as (xt, st, at0, at1, yt) : t ∈[N] for each individual t.

The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley and Terry, 1952) has been widely used to

capture how preferences influence the choices of experts. Let r0 and r1 denote the preferences

associated with actions a0 and a1, respectively. The BTL model assumes that the probability of

selecting an action is proportional to the exponential of its preference. Specifically, the probabilities

are given by:

P(y = 1) =
exp(r1)
exp(r0) + exp(r1)
and
P(y = 0) =
exp(r0)
exp(r0) + exp(r1).

The homogeneous preference model (Ouyang et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,

2023) assumes that the probability of choosing an action depends solely on the query and the

available actions, making it identical across individuals. To account for heterogeneity, we introduce

a contextual preference model, which reflects individual-specific preferences. Specifically, we

11

model the reward function using a bilinear form:

rΘ∗(x, s, a) = x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a),
(1)

where x ∈X represents the individual’s context, Θ∗∈Rdx×dϕ is a parameter matrix, and ϕ(s, a)

is the feature embedding for the query-action pair. Under this model, the probability of selecting

action a1 over a0, given query s and context x, is:

P(y = 1|x, s, a1, a0) =
exp(x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a1))
exp(x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a0)) + exp(x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a1)).

This formulation introduces variability in the choice probabilities by incorporating the context x,

thereby capturing the heterogeneity among individuals.

The high dimensionality of context and feature embeddings poses significant computational

challenges, as estimating the matrix parameter scales with the product of their dimensions. Inspired

by the successful application of low-rank approximations in reinforcement learning (Jun et al., 2019;

Hu et al., 2021), we impose a low-rank structure on the parameter matrix. Let r be the rank of the

parameter matrix Θ∗, and let Θ∗= U∗D∗(V ∗)⊤represent its singular value decomposition (SVD)

of Θ∗, where U∗and V ∗are square matrices, and D∗∈Rdx×dϕ with {di : i ∈[r]} as its r non-zero

diagonal entries. The reward function rΘ∗(x, s, a) can then be expressed as:

rΘ∗(x, s, a) = x⊤· U∗D∗(V ∗)⊤· ϕ(s, a),

which simplifies to:

r
X

i=1
di

(U∗)⊤x



(V ∗)⊤ϕ(s, a)


rΘ∗(x, s, a) =

i .

i

This formulation demonstrates that U∗and V ∗project the original features into a low-dimensional

subspace, significantly reducing computational complexity, as illustrated in Figure 3.

Remark 1 (Model Assumptions in RLHF). Our setting aligns with standard preference-based

reward modeling in RLHF, where feedback is collected via pairwise comparisons and rewards are

learned over high-dimensional representations produced by pre-trained models (Ouyang et al., 2022;

12

Zhu et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024). Contextual information, when available, can be incorporated

to account for systematic heterogeneity across users or tasks, as is common in large-scale human

feedback datasets (Kirk et al., 2023). The low-rank structure assumed in this work is motivated

by empirical findings in RLHF and preference learning, which suggest that variation in human

preferences is often governed by a small number of latent factors despite the high dimensionality of

learned representations (Hu et al., 2021; Park et al., 2024; Bose et al., 2025; Fan et al., 2025).

Remark 2 (Flexibility of the bilinear model). The bilinear reward model generalizes various exist-

ing reward models. First, when dx = 1 with X = {1} ∈R, the model reduces to rθ(s, a) = θ⊤ϕ(s, a),

corresponding to the reward model for homogeneous individuals (Zhu et al., 2023). Second, the

Boltzmann-model (Jeon et al., 2020; Barnett et al., 2023) models the reward as βr(s, a), where

β is a rationality parameter.
If the reward r(s, a) is linear with respect to ϕ(s, a), such that

r(s, a) = θ⊤
1 ϕ(s, a), and β is a linear function of context x i.e., β(x) = x⊤θ2, then the reward

function becomes: r(x, s, a) = β(x)r(s, a) = x⊤θ2θ⊤
1 ϕ(s, a), which is the special case of formulation

(1) with Θ∗= θ2θ⊤
1 being a rank-1 matrix. Finally, to model the diversity of human preferences,

Zhong et al. (2024) considers M types of individuals each with reward given as rm = (θ∗
m)⊤ϕ(s, a),

where θ∗
m ∈Rd and ϕ : S × A →Rd is a known feature mapping. This setup is also a special case

of formulation (1), where M = dx, d = dϕ, Θ∗= (θ∗
1, θ∗
2, . . . , θ∗
M)⊤, and x = em for individual of

type m, where em is the m-th standard unit vector in RM.

2.2
Value of Policy

Next, we show how the contextual preference model effectively tackles personalization and

distribution shift challenges. Let ρ be the joint distribution of context x and state s in the evaluation

set. In the personalization problem, the individual feature x is available for the policy, enabling

the policy to adapt its responses based on the context of each individual. Formally, the policy is

defined as π : X × S 7→A, allowing it to provide tailored answers for different contexts. The value

13

of the policy is then defined as:

J(π) := E(x,s)∼ρrΘ∗(x, s, π(x, s)).

In the personalization problem, the objective is to determine an individualized policy π(x, s)

that provides personalized responses for each individual with context x, even when the the same

query s is presented. The goal is to maximize the value of the policy.

The second case is the distribution shift problem. Unlike the personalization problem, the

features of individuals are unavailable during evaluation in this second case. In this case, the policy

is defined as a function of s alone, i.e., π(s). The corresponding value is given by

J(π) := E(x,s)∼ρrΘ∗(x, s, π(s)).

In the distribution shift problem, the objective is to find a global policy π(s) that provides a

unified response for all individuals, maximizing the expected value of the policy. It is important

to note that the evaluation distribution ρ may differ from the offline training distribution. If the

contextual preference model is not considered, a homogeneous reward model would optimize the

policy to maximize value based on the offline data distribution, potentially leading to suboptimal

performance in the evaluation environment.

For brevity, we use the notation rθ(x, s, π) to represent rθ(x, s, π(x, s)) in the personalization

problem and rθ(x, s, π(s)) in the distribution shift problem.
The sub-optimality of a policy is

defined as

SubOpt(π) := J(π∗) −J(π),

where π∗= arg maxπ J(π) denotes the optimal policy. The objective is to determine a policy that

minimizes the sub-optimality by leveraging the offline dataset.

Remark 3 (Connection with Zhong et al. (2024)). When X represents the set of standard unit

vectors in RM and x ∼ρx with ρx being the uniform distribution, the formulation aligns with the

14

framework proposed by Zhong et al. (2024) under the Utilitarian welfare objective. However, while

their approach assumes that the query and answers (si, ai0, ai1) are generated from the same dis-

tribution for all individuals, our framework accommodates scenarios where different state-action

pairs are presented to each human expert.
Additionally, our framework can be extended to ac-

commodate alternative objective functions. Specifically, the value function can be generalized as:

J(π) := E(x,s)∼ρl(rΘ∗(x, s, π(s)) −r0), where l is a specified transformation, and r0 represents the

minimum value of the reward function. For example, when l is the logarithmic function, this for-

mulation corresponds to the Nash welfare objective. The theoretical results remain valid with slight

modifications, provided that l is a Lipschitz continuous function.

3
Algorithm

In this section, we propose the Pessimism in Reduced Subspace (PRS) policy to address

the LoCo-RLHF problem. Before introducing the details, we first outline the three main steps in

the PRS algorithm.

1. Estimation of the Low-rank Subspace: We begin by solving the rank-constrained max-

imum likelihood estimation problem to obtain the low-rank estimate ˆΘ.
Using the SVD

ˆΘ = ˆU ˆD( ˆV )⊤, we obtain an estimate of the low-rank subspaces, where ˆU and ˆV represent

the linear transformation into the low-rank subspace.

2. Reduction to the Low-rank Subspace: Next, we apply the rotation-truncation-vectorization

(RTV) process to the parameter Θ, individual contexts and embedded features with respect

to the estimated subspaces ˆU and ˆV .
This transformation reduces dimensionality of the

parameter space from dxdϕ to (dx +dϕ)r−r2, while introducing minimal error from subspace

estimation. Using the reduced space, we compute the MLE ˆθrtv of the approximate likelihood

function, which is used to efficiently estimate the true preference function.

3. Pessimism in the Reduced Space: Finally we construct the confidence set ΘB(ˆθrtv)

15

around the estimate ˆθrtv by quantifying the uncertainty in the estimation process. Using this

confidence set, we define the pessimistic value function:

ˆJ(π) :=
min
θ∈ΘB(ˆθrtv)
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, π),

which represents the pessimistic estimate of the reward under a given policy. The pessimistic

policy ˆπ is then defined by solving ˆπ = arg max ˆJ(π).

3.1
Estimation of the Low-rank Subspace

We begin by splitting the dataset into two partitions: the first N0 observations are used to

estimate the low-rank subspace, while the remaining N −N0 observations are used to estimate the

parameter and quantify the uncertainty in the reduced space. Given the dataset {(xt, st, at0, at1, yt :

t ∈[N0]}, the contextual preference model in the BTL model (1) implies that the negative log-

likelihood is given by:

N0
X

L(Θ) = 1


log

1 + exp(−x⊤
t Θ(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0)))

+ (1 −yt)x⊤
t Θ(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0))

.

N0

t=1

(2)

Based on it, the rank-constrained optimization problem can be formulated as

min
Θ∈Rdx×dϕ,rank(Θ)≤r
L(Θ),

which can be solved using the Burer-Monteiro formulation (Burer and Monteiro, 2003). This

approach factorizes Θ = UV ⊤, where U ∈Rdx×r and V ∈Rdϕ×r. To ensure identifiability, we

introduce a regularization term following Zheng and Lafferty (2016). The resulting optimization

problem is formulated as:


˜L(U, V ) := L(UV ⊤) + 1


.

8∥U⊤U −V ⊤V ∥2
F

min
U∈Rdx×r,V ∈Rdϕ×r

To solve this non-convex optimization problem, we employ the alternating Factored Gradient

16

Descent (FGD) method. FGD performs gradient descent on each component iteratively:

U ←U −η · ∇U ˜L(U, V ),
V ←V −η · ∇V ˜L(U, V ),

where η denotes the learning rate, and ∇U, ∇V are the gradients with respect to U and V , re-

spectively. By alternately updating each component, the estimated parameter converges to the

true parameter, provided that certain conditions on the initial estimate and the learning rate are

satisfied (Zheng and Lafferty, 2016; Zhang et al., 2023). The full details of the FGD procedure are

outlined in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 FGD - Factored Gradient Descent
Input: Gradients of the loss function ∇U L and ∇V L, initial estimate Θ0 and step size η.
Initialization: SVD Θ0 = U0D0V ⊤
0 and initialize U (0) = U0D1/2
0
and V (0) = V0D1/2
0 .
1: for k = 1, . . ., do
2:
Update U (k+1) = U (k) −η∇UL|U=U(k),V =V (k);

3:
Update V (k+1) = V (k) −η∇V L|U=U(k+1),V =V (k);
4:
Repeat until objective function converges.
5: end for
return ˆΘ = U (k)(V (k))⊤.

In our experiments, we compute the initial estimate Θ0 using the unconstrained maximum

likelihood estimator. Convex optimization algorithms, such as L-BFGS (Liu and Nocedal, 1989),

or gradient-based methods can be applied to obtain this initial parameter estimate.

3.2
Reduction to the Low-rank Subspace

RL algorithms leverage uncertainty quantification to improve performance, such as the “opti-

mism in the face of uncertainty” approach for online RL (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) and pes-

simistic policies for offline RL (Jin et al., 2021; Rashidinejad et al., 2021). Existing uncertainty

quantification methods are primarily designed for vector parameters, making them less suited to

our high-dimensional matrix parameter space Rdx×dϕ. The large number of components in this

space as well as the low-rank structure of the matrix parameter create significant challenges for

effective uncertainty quantification. To address this challenge, we propose the “rotation-truncation-

17

vectorization” (RTV) method. This mapping explicitly exploits the low-rank structure of Θ∗to

reduce the effective dimension from dxdϕ to r(dx + dϕ). The construction proceeds in three steps:

aligning the matrix via rotation, discarding negligible components via truncation and flattening the

result for inference.

Let ˆΘ = ˆU ˆD ˆV ⊤be the SVD of the estimate obtained from Algorithm 1. Intuitively, if the

estimated subspaces ˆU and ˆV are accurate, rotating the true parameter Θ∗in the direction of ˆU

and ˆV should yield a close approximation of the rank r diagonal matrix. For a detailed explanation,

let (U∗
1 , U∗
2 ), (V ∗
1 , V ∗
2 ), ( ˆU1, ˆU2) and ( ˆV1, ˆV2) be partitions of U∗, V ∗, ˆU and ˆV , where (·)1 represent

the first r columns and (·)2 denotes the remaining columns of the matrix. Let Θ∗
r be the rotation

of Θ∗with respect to the estimated subspace given by Θ∗
r := ˆU⊤Θ∗ˆV . We partition Θ∗
r into four

sub-blocks based on the rank r:







(Θ∗
r)11
(Θ∗
r)12

Θ∗
r =


.

(Θ∗
r)21
(Θ∗
r)22

Figure 4: Illustration of rotation-truncation-vectorization.

Then we employ the “subtraction method” commonly used in the low-rank matrix bandit

literature (Kveton et al., 2017; Jun et al., 2019; Kang et al., 2022), to reduce the dimension. As

illustrated in Figure 4, when ˆU, ˆV are close to the true subspaces, the block (Θ∗
r)22 is expected to

be negligible as it is the product of two estimation error terms ˆU⊤
2 U1 and ˆV ⊤
2 V1. By truncating

18

this block, we retain only the essential parameters:

θ∗
rtv := (vec((Θ∗
r)11)⊤, vec((Θ∗
r)12)⊤, vec((Θ∗
r)21)⊤)⊤∈R(dx+dϕ)r−r2.
(3)

This reduced vector θ∗
rtv ∈R(dx+dϕ)r−r2 serves as the basis for efficient uncertainty quantifica-

tion. Now the contextual preference model can be reformulated as:

rΘ∗(x, s, a) = x⊤Θ∗ϕ(s, a) = ( ˆU⊤x)⊤(Θ∗
r)( ˆV ⊤ϕ(s, a)) = ⟨( ˆU⊤x)( ˆV ⊤ϕ(s, a))⊤, Θ∗
r⟩.

Here, ( ˆU⊤x)( ˆV ⊤ϕ(s, a))⊤= ˆU⊤(xϕ(s, a)⊤) ˆV is the rotation of xϕ(s, a)⊤with respect to ˆU

and ˆV . Let Z = xϕ(s, a)⊤and zrtv denote the rotation-truncation-vectorization of Z. Then, the

contextual reward function can be expressed as:

rΘ∗(x, s, a) = ⟨Z, Θ∗⟩= ⟨zrtv, θ∗
rtv⟩+ ⟨(Zr)22, (Θ∗
r)22⟩≈⟨zrtv, θ∗
rtv⟩,

where the approximation holds as (Θ∗
r)22 ≈0. This reformulation allows us to focus on estimating

the low-dimensional parameter θ∗
rtv ∈Rk, where k = (dx + dϕ)r −r2 rather than the full matrix

Θ∗∈Rdx×dϕ.
This significantly reduces the computational complexity while maintaining the

model’s accuracy.

After reducing the problem to a low-dimensional subspace, we re-estimate the parameter in this

reduced space. For the remaining N −N0 observations, define Zt = xt(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0))⊤and

let zt,rtv ∈Rk be the rotation-truncation-vectorization of Zt for t > N0. The approximate negative

log-likelihood function in the reduced space is defined as:

N
X

Lrtv(θrtv) =
1
N −N0


log

1 + exp(−z⊤
t,rtvθrtv))

+ (1 −yt)z⊤
t,rtvθrtv)

,
(4)

t=N0+1

where θrtv ∈Rk. As the approximate likelihood function is convex with respect to θrtv, convex

optimization methods can be applied to obtain the estimate ˆθrtv.

19

3.3
Pessimism in the Reduced Low-rank Space

Finally, we apply the pessimistic approach, which is widely used in offline reinforcement learn-

ing (Li et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023). Instead of the greedy approach that maximizes the esti-

mated reward function based on the estimated parameter, the pessimistic approach maximizes the

pessimistic reward. This reward is defined by penalizing the estimated reward based on the

uncertainty quantification of the parameter. Intuitively, actions are penalized if the uncertainty in

the estimated reward is high. This approach mitigates the risk of selecting suboptimal actions that

may result from inaccurate estimates due to the distribution of the offline dataset.

To quantify uncertainty, we define the empirical second moment in the reduced space: W =

1
n0
Pn0
t=1 zt,rtvz⊤
t,rtv. Using this, we construct the confidence set {θrtv : ∥θrtv −ˆθrtv∥W ≤C} where

∥· ∥W represents the Mahalanobis norm weighted by W, and C is the confidence threshold.

To define the pessimistic reward based on this confidence set, we introduce the approximate

reward function with respect to θrtv:

rθrtv(x, s, a) = zrtv(x, s, a)⊤θrtv,

where zrtv(x, s, a) is the rotation-truncation-vectorization of xϕ(s, a)⊤. The pessimistic value func-

tion is then defined as:

ˆJ(π) :=
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, π).

The complete PRS algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2.

In case where the policy can be parametrized as πθ, finding the pessimistic policy can be solved

via gradient based methods.

20

Algorithm 2 Pessimism in Reduced Space (PRS) Algorithm

Input: Dataset {(xi, si, ai0, ai1, yi : i ∈[N]}, rank of parameter matrix r, learning rate η,
initial parameter estimate Θ0 for Algorithm 1 and subspace exploration length N0.
1: Obtain the rank-constrained MLE ˆΘ = ˆU ˆD ˆV ⊤by applying Algorithm 1 to the first N0
observations;
2: Rotate-truncate-vectorize the remaining N −N0 observations and find the maximizer of
(4);
3: Construct confidence set ΘB = {θrtv : ∥θrtv −ˆθrtv∥W ≤C};
4: Construct the pessimistic value function ˆJ(π) = minθrtv∈ΘB E(x,s)∼ρ rθrtv(x, s, π);

5: Calculate ˆπ = arg maxπ ˆJ(π).
return The pessimistic policy ˆπ.

4
Theory

In this section, we first present the assumptions required to establish the rate of the sub-

optimality gap. We then derive the estimation error for the low-rank subspace estimation and

provide an upper bound on the sub-optimality gap for the PRS algorithm.

4.1
Assumptions

We begin by introducing the boundedness condition and the positive definite second moment

condition of the features and the parameter.

Assumption 1 (Boundedness). The expert feature xt is bounded by Bx, i.e., ∥xt∥2 ≤Bx. For any

query s ∈S and answer a ∈A, the feature embedding ϕ is bounded, i.e., ∥ϕ(s, a)∥2 ≤Bϕ. For the

matrix parameter Θ∗, ∥Θ∥F ≤Bθ for all Θ ∈B(Θ∗, 1).

Assumption 2 (Positive Definite Second Moment). Suppose the context-state-actions (xt, st, at1, at2) ∼

P for the data distribution P. Let zt = (ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0)) ⊗xt. Then EP ztz⊤
t = Σ ≻0.

The boundedness assumption is common in contextual reinforcement learning problems (Li

et al., 2017; Zhan et al., 2023). The invertibility of the second moment of the feature is required

to guarantee that the parameter is identifiable. Suppose EP xtx⊤
t = Σx ≻0 and EP (ϕ(st, at1) −

21

ϕ(st, at0))(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0))⊤= Σϕ ≻0, with xt ⊥(st, at0, at1).
Then Σ = Σϕ ⊗Σx and

therefore Σ ≻0. In other words, if the features from the state-action pairs and contexts both

have positive definite second moment and are independent, Assumption 2 is satisfied. When xt is

uniformly distributed over standard unit vectors of RM, it becomes equivalent with the problem in

Zhong et al. (2024), which assumes each query-answer pair is given to each of the M user types.

Remark 4 (Interpretation of Theoretical Assumptions in RLHF). The boundedness assumption

(Assumption 1) is standard in preference-based RLHF (Zhu et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024). Un-

der the BTL model, preference probabilities depend exponentially on reward differences. If feature

magnitudes or reward values are allowed to grow without control, moderate differences already lead

to near-deterministic comparisons. In such regimes, observed feedback carries vanishing informa-

tion, making offline estimation statistically infeasible. In practice, boundedness can be enforced

through normalization or clipping of learned representations. Moreover, the positive definiteness

assumption (Assumption 2) on the second-moment matrix ensures identifiability of the reward pa-

rameters under preference feedback and is also standard in preference learning and RLHF (Zhong

et al., 2024). This condition rules out degenerate or redundant feature directions and guarantees

that each parameter dimension is identifiable from the observed comparisons.

4.2
Main Results

We first present the estimation bound of the low-rank estimator.

Theorem 1 (Informal Estimation Bound). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Let r denote the

rank of Θ∗, with σ1 ≥σ2 ≥· · · σr > 0 as its singular values. Assume we have an initial estimate

Θ0 ∈Rdx×dϕ such that ∥Θ0 −Θ∗∥F ≤c2√σr for some constant c2. Then for the low-rank estimator

ˆΘ achieved from Algorithm 1 with learning rate η = c1/σ1, we have the estimation bound:

s

σ1r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
σrN0

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥F ≤C1 ·

with probability at least 1 −δ for some constant C1 > 0.

22

Remark 5 (Initial Estimate Θ0). We assume the availability of an initial estimate Θ0 that is

reasonably close to Θ∗. This assumption is standard in low-rank matrix estimation problems (Jain

et al., 2013; Chi et al., 2019; Xia and Yuan, 2021) and is commonly referred to as the “basin of

attraction” condition, ensuring that the algorithm converges to the desired target. This assumption

holds in various scenarios. For instance, when the sample size is sufficiently large, the unconstrained

maximum likelihood estimator can serve as a warm start for Algorithm 1, providing an initial

estimate close to Θ∗.

The estimation error bound is proportional to √r, whereas without the low-rank assumption,

it would scale with
p

min{dx, dϕ}. This highlights the critical role of the low-rank assumption

in reducing estimation error.
This rate aligns with bounds in the low-rank matrix estimation

literature, particularly under the assumption of bounded ℓ2-norms for the context x and feature

embedding ϕ(s, a). Specifically, if the max-norm of the parameter matrix is bounded, the ℓ2-norm

bound scales with dx and dϕ, consistent with results in Negahban and Wainwright (2011), Xia

and Yuan (2021), and Zhu et al. (2022). Building on this result, we derive the following corollary

concerning the error induced by the rotation-truncation-vectorization process.

Corollary 1 (Error induced by Rotation-Truncation-Vectorization). Suppose ∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥F ≤B for

some B > 0. Then,

∥(Θ∗
r)22∥F ≤C2 · σ1

σ2r
· B2
(5)

for some constant C2 > 0.

The details of the proof are provided in Appendices S.6.2 and S.6.3. Using these results, we

establish the confidence bounds for the estimator ˆθrtv in the reduced space.

Lemma 1 (Confidence Bound on θrtv). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Further assume that

∥(Θ∗
r)22∥F ≤S⊥for some S⊥. Let ˆθrtv be the minimizer of the approximate negative log-likelihood

23

function (4). Then,





s

C3 · (dx + dϕ)r + log(1/δ)

∥ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv∥W ≤1

N −N0
+ 1

2BxBϕ · S⊥·
q

(dx + dϕ)r





γ

with probability at least 1 −δ.

Finally, we derive an upper bound on the sub-optimality gap for the proposed policy.

Theorem 2 (Upper Bound of Sub-optimality). Suppose Assumptions 1 - 2 hold with n0 = Ω(n)

and n1 = n −n0 = Ω(n). Then,

!

r

(dx + dϕ) · r + log(1/δ)

J(π∗) −J(ˆπ) = O

C∗·

N

with probability at least 1 −δ, where C∗=


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


W −1.

In low-rank case where r ≪min{dx, dϕ}, our bound represents a significant improvement over

O

C∗·
q

n

achieved by existing methods (Zhu et al., 2023). Moreover, the setting in

dxdϕ+log(1/δ)

Zhong et al. (2024) is a special case of our framework when the true clustering structure of human

feedback is known with M = dx and d = dϕ. They derived a sub-optimality rate of

r2/n + (dr2 log d + r log(M/δ))/(Mn) · ˜C∗,

M
p

where ˜C∗= maxm ∥(Σ−1/2
m
Es∼ρ ϕ(s, π∗(s))∥2.
Assume r ≪M ≪d, and ignoring logarithmic

factors, their rate simplifies to M ·
q

(M+d)r2+r log( M

δ )
Mn
· ˜C∗. Noting that their value function is

defined as the sum over M types for the utilitarian welfare function, and we can verify that our

rate of ˜C∗·
q

(M+d)r+log( 1

δ )
n
matches this bound in this special case.

Remark 6 (Discussion on Concentratability Coefficient). The concentratability coefficient C∗is

invariant under rotation and decreases as covariates are removed. Since the rotation in the bilinear

form remains a rotation after vectorization, the rotation-truncation-vectorization (RTV) process

reduces the concentratability coefficient. When the matrix is full-rank, RTV simplifies to a pure

rotation, ensuring consistency in the concentratability coefficient. Furthermore, this aligns with

24

the concentratability coefficient defined in Zhu et al. (2023) when x = 1, i.e., in the absence of

contextual information. The theoretical details are provided in Appendix S.6.1.

The analysis of our algorithm presents several challenges. First, the rank-constrained maximum

likelihood estimation problem is inherently non-convex, which precludes the direct application of

classical results from the convex optimization literature. Moreover, the offline dataset comprises

binary responses from human experts, rather than quantitative data. This characteristic compli-

cates the derivation of the estimation bounds, as it requires handling the discrete nature of the

data. During the uncertainty quantification step, both the estimation error of the subspace and

the likelihood estimation contribute to the overall uncertainty of the parameter estimate in the re-

duced space. Lastly, the approximation of the preference function in the reduced space is similarly

influenced by the subspace estimation error, which propagates through the analysis and affects the

policy’s value. To address these challenges, we develop novel tools that incorporate subspace esti-

mation error into the construction of estimation bounds and the approximation of the preference

function. These tools provide insights into how the subspace estimation error impacts the value of

the policy, ensuring a rigorous analysis of our algorithm.

5
Numerical Studies

5.1
Simulation Studies

In this section, we compare the sub-optimality gap of the proposed policy with several bench-

marks in the simulations. We set X = Rdx and S = Rds, and generate individual user contexts xt

and states st independently from Unif([−1, 1]). The action space is A = {0, 1, . . . , da −1}.

To generate the state-action feature representation ϕ(s, a), we first generate a matrix M ∈

Rds×ds by sampling each entry independently from Unif([−1, 1]) and normalizing it to satisfy

25

∥M∥F = 1. The feature mapping ϕ : S × A →Rdϕ, where dϕ = da + ds −1, is defined as






(0⊤
da−1, 0.1 Ms⊤),
a = 0,

ϕ(s, a) =

(e⊤
a , 0.1 Ms⊤),
a ≥1,





where 0da−1 ∈Rda−1 is the zero vector and ea ∈Rda−1 is the a-th standard basis vector. This

construction applies one-hot encoding to the categorical action variable and concatenates it with a

scaled state-dependent feature.

The reward parameter matrix Θ ∈Rdx×dϕ is constructed to have rank r.
For each k ∈

1, . . . , da −1, define

k,
1
k + 1, . . . ,
1
k + r −1, 0, . . . , 0
⊤
∈Rdx,

wk =
1

so that only the first r components are non-zero, and let vk = wk/∥wk∥2. We then set Θ:,k = 2 · vk,

for k = 1, . . . , da −1, with all remaining columns corresponding to state features set to zero. The

scaling factor 2 controls the signal strength. By construction, Θ has rank r, inducing a smoothly

varying low-rank structure across actions.

To model heterogeneous coverage in offline preference data, we introduce an imbalanced distri-

bution over action pairs controlled by a parameter q. Specifically, for a fraction 1/q of the samples,

action pairs are drawn uniformly from {(0, a1) ∈A × A : a1 ̸= 0}, while for the remaining fraction

1 −1/q, the action pair is fixed as (0, 1). As q increases, the majority of comparisons involve only

actions 0 and 1, resulting in increasingly imbalanced feedback

We generate parameters, contexts, and features to simulate human feedback and assess the

policy on a new set of contexts x and states s. For comparison, we use two baseline policies.

• MLE-Greedy: This policy uses the MLE obtained from the unconstrained maximum like-

lihood problem. Since the negative log-likelihood function is convex, the estimator can be

26

efficiently computed. Using the MLE ˆΘ = arg maxΘ L(Θ) with L defined in (2), the policy

evaluates the estimated value of each action and selects the greedy action:

ˆπgreedy(x, s) = arg max
a∈A
rˆΘ(x, s, a).

• MLE-Pessimistic: Similar to MLE-Greedy, this policy uses the MLE ˆΘ but incorporates

the pessimistic approach from Zhu et al. (2023). To adapt the bilinear formulation of the

reward to the linear framework used in Zhu et al. (2023), the feature vector is modified to

zt = ϕ(st, at) ⊗xt ∈Rdxdϕ, representing the vectorization of the outer product. This feature

vector is used to quantify the confidence bound. Given the pessimistic value function ˆJ(π) =

minΘ∈CB(ˆΘ) E(x,s)∼ρrΘ(x, s, a) with CB(ˆΘ) being the confidence bound on the vectorized

feature, this policy maximizes the pessimistic value function:

ˆπpess = arg max
π
ˆJ(π).

We evaluate our proposed PRS policy alongside the MLE-Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic policies

as baselines. For details of implementing the policy optimization problem ˆπ = arg max ˆJ(π), we

refer to Appendix S.5. For PRS and MLE-Pessimistic, we use the approximate solution defined in

(S2) of the Appendix. Each simulation is repeated 20 times, and the sub-optimality gap is reported

for N ∈{1000, 2000, 3000, 5000, 10000} under various scenarios.

We first study the impact of offline data imbalance on policy performance.
We set ds =

20, da = 10, dx = 20 with rank r = 3, resulting in Θ ∈R20×29. As shown in Figure5, as the im-

balance parameter q increases, all methods exhibit larger sub-optimality gaps. Among the policies,

MLE-Greedy consistently performs the worst, while the proposed PRS policy achieves the best per-

formance across all settings. Moreover, the gap between the methods widens as the data imbalance

increases, highlighting the robustness of the PRS policy to variations in offline data distribution.

Next we evaluate the effect of the low-rank assumption on policy performance. Similar to the

first experiment, we use ds = 20, da = 10, dx = 20, but here we fix imbalance parameter q = 3 and

27

Figure 5: Sub optimality gap of our proposed PRS policy compared with MLE-
Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic when the imbalance differs in datasets.

vary the ranks r ∈{1, 3, 5}. As shown in Figure 6, across all ranks, the proposed PRS method

consistently outperforms the MLE-Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic policies. The sub-optimality gap

is nearly zero when r = 1, indicating excellent performance under strong low-rank assumptions.

As the rank increases, the performance gap narrows, indicating diminishing gains as the reward

structure becomes less compressible.

Figure 6: Sub optimality gap of our proposed PRS policy compared with MLE-
Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic when the true rank differs.

28

5.2
PersonalLLM Dataset

We next evaluate our method on the PersonalLLM dataset (Zollo et al., 2024), a publicly re-

leased benchmark designed to study personalization in large language models. The dataset consists

of prompts covering a wide range of topics and intents (9,402 for training and 1,000 for testing), each

paired with responses generated by 8 different large language models, including GPT-4o, Claude 3,

Llama 3, and Gemini Pro 1.5. Each response is further evaluated by 10 different reward models,

yielding heterogeneous preference signals, as illustrated in Figure 7.

Figure 7: Illustration of the PersonalLLM dataset. For each prompt, multiple re-
sponses generated by different LLMs are evaluated by a collection of reward models.

Following the experimental procedure of Bose et al. (2025), we generate user contexts from

a uniform distribution.
For each prompt-response pair, we collect the scores produced by the

10 reward models and standardize them to have mean 0 and unit variance. These standardized

scores are used as the feature representation ϕ(s, a), where s denotes the prompt and a denotes

the candidate response. We then construct a low-rank reward parameter matrix using the same

procedure as in the simulations.

We compare the proposed PRS policy with the MLE-Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic baselines.

29

In the training data, for each prompt, we randomly sample a pair of responses from the 8 candidate

LLM outputs and generate a binary preference label according to the BTL model. We then evaluate

the sub-optimality gap of each policy relative to the optimal decision rule on the test dataset. As

shown in Figure 8, the proposed PRS policy achieves consistently lower sub-optimality gaps than the

baseline methods for different ranks, illustrating the benefit of incorporating low-rank contextual

structure in preference-based RLHF problems.

Figure 8: Sub-optimality gap of the proposed PRS policy compared with MLE-
Greedy and MLE-Pessimistic with varying ranks on the PersonalLLM dataset.

To further assess robustness, we evaluate performance under the presence of irrelevant noisy

features. Specifically, we augment ϕ(s, a) by concatenating additional noise dimensions, thereby

increasing the ambient feature dimension without changing the underlying preference structure. As

shown in Figure 9, the proposed PRS policy maintains stable performance, whereas the baseline

methods deteriorate as the feature dimension increases.

References

Abbasi-Yadkori, Y., P´al, D., and Szepesv´ari, C. (2011). Improved algorithms for linear stochastic

bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24.

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Al-

tenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. (2023). Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2303.08774.

30

Figure 9: Sub-optimality gap on the PersonalLLM dataset with augmented noisy
features.

Aghajanyan, A., Zettlemoyer, L., and Gupta, S. (2020).
Intrinsic dimensionality explains the

effectiveness of language model fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13255.

Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., DasSarma, N., Drain, D., Fort, S., Ganguli,

D., Henighan, T., et al. (2022). Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement

learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862.

Barnett, P., Freedman, R., Svegliato, J., and Russell, S. (2023).
Active reward learning from

multiple teachers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00894.

Bian, Z., Shi, C., Qi, Z., and Wang, L. (2024). Off-policy evaluation in doubly inhomogeneous

environments. Journal of the American Statistical Association, pages 1–27.

Boldi, R., Ding, L., Spector, L., and Niekum, S. (2024). Pareto-optimal learning from preferences

with hidden context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15599.

Bose, A., Xiong, Z., Chi, Y., Du, S. S., Xiao, L., and Fazel, M. (2025). Lore: Personalizing llms

via low-rank reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14439.

Bradley, R. A. and Terry, M. E. (1952). Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method

of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345.

Brown, T. B. (2020). Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165.

Burer, S. and Monteiro, R. D. (2003). A nonlinear programming algorithm for solving semidefinite

programs via low-rank factorization. Mathematical Programming, 95(2):329–357.

31

Cai, J., Chen, R., Wainwright, M. J., and Zhao, L. (2023). Doubly high-dimensional contextual

bandits: An interpretable model for joint assortment-pricing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08634.

Casper, S., Davies, X., Shi, C., Gilbert, T. K., Scheurer, J., Rando, J., Freedman, R., Korbak, T.,

Lindner, D., Freire, P., et al. (2023). Open problems and fundamental limitations of reinforcement

learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15217.

Chakraborty, S., Qiu, J., Yuan, H., Koppel, A., Huang, F., Manocha, D., Bedi, A. S., and Wang,

M. (2024). Maxmin-rlhf: Towards equitable alignment of large language models with diverse

human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08925.

Chen, Y., Fan, J., Ma, C., and Yan, Y. (2019). Inference and uncertainty quantification for noisy

matrix completion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(46):22931–22937.

Chen, Y., Fan, J., Ma, C., and Yan, Y. (2021). Bridging convex and nonconvex optimization in

robust pca: Noise, outliers, and missing data. Annals of statistics, 49(5):2948.

Chi, Y., Lu, Y. M., and Chen, Y. (2019). Nonconvex optimization meets low-rank matrix factor-

ization: An overview. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(20):5239–5269.

Christiano, P. F., Leike, J., Brown, T., Martic, M., Legg, S., and Amodei, D. (2017). Deep rein-

forcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems,

30.

Dettmers, T., Pagnoni, A., Holtzman, A., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2024). Qlora: Efficient finetuning

of quantized llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36.

Ding, N., Qin, Y., Yang, G., Wei, F., Yang, Z., Su, Y., Hu, S., Chen, Y., Chan, C.-M., Chen, W.,

et al. (2023). Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large-scale pre-trained language models. Nature

Machine Intelligence, 5(3):220–235.

Duan, C., Li, J., and Xia, D. (2024). Online policy learning and inference by matrix completion.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17398.

Fan, J., Hou, J., and Yu, M. (2024a). Covariate assisted entity ranking with sparse intrinsic scores.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08814.

Fan, J., Hou, J., and Yu, M. (2024b). Uncertainty quantification of mle for entity ranking with

covariates. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 25(358):1–83.

32

Fan, J., Kwon, H., and Zhu, X. (2025). Uncertainty quantification for ranking with heterogeneous

preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01847.

Fan, Y. and Tang, C. Y. (2013). Tuning parameter selection in high dimensional penalized likeli-

hood. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 75(3):531–552.

Feffer, M., Heidari, H., and Lipton, Z. C. (2023). Moral machine or tyranny of the majority? In

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pages 5974–5982.

Fu, Z., Qi, Z., Wang, Z., Yang, Z., Xu, Y., and Kosorok, M. R. (2022). Offline reinforcement

learning with instrumental variables in confounded markov decision processes. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2209.08666.

Hsu, D., Kakade, S. M., and Zhang, T. (2012). A tail inequality for quadratic forms of subgaussian

random vectors. Electronic Communications in Probability, 17.

Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., and Chen, W. (2021).

Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685.

Jain, P., Netrapalli, P., and Sanghavi, S. (2013). Low-rank matrix completion using alternating

minimization. In Proceedings of the forty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing,

pages 665–674.

Jang, J., Kim, S., Lin, B. Y., Wang, Y., Hessel, J., Zettlemoyer, L., Hajishirzi, H., Choi, Y., and

Ammanabrolu, P. (2023). Personalized soups: Personalized large language model alignment via

post-hoc parameter merging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11564.

Jeon, H. J., Milli, S., and Dragan, A. (2020). Reward-rational (implicit) choice: A unifying formal-

ism for reward learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:4415–4426.

Jin, Y., Yang, Z., and Wang, Z. (2021). Is pessimism provably efficient for offline rl? In International

Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5084–5096. PMLR.

Jun, K.-S., Willett, R., Wright, S., and Nowak, R. (2019). Bilinear bandits with low-rank structure.

In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3163–3172. PMLR.

Kang, Y., Hsieh, C.-J., and Lee, T. C. M. (2022). Efficient frameworks for generalized low-rank

matrix bandit problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:19971–19983.

33

Kiran, B. R., Sobh, I., Talpaert, V., Mannion, P., Al Sallab, A. A., Yogamani, S., and P´erez, P.

(2021). Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE Transactions on

Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23(6):4909–4926.

Kirk, H. R., Vidgen, B., R¨ottger, P., and Hale, S. A. (2023). Personalisation within bounds: A risk

taxonomy and policy framework for the alignment of large language models with personalised

feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05453.

Konishi, S. and Kitagawa, G. (1996).
Generalised information criteria in model selection.

Biometrika, 83(4):875–890.

Kveton, B., Szepesv´ari, C., Rao, A., Wen, Z., Abbasi-Yadkori, Y., and Muthukrishnan, S. (2017).

Stochastic low-rank bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.04644.

Lee, S. J., Sun, W. W., and Liu, Y. (2025).
Low-rank online dynamic assortment with dual

contextual information. Journal of the American Statistical Association, (just-accepted):1–22.

Li, C., Farkhoor, H., Liu, R., and Yosinski, J. (2018). Measuring the intrinsic dimension of objective

landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08838.

Li, G., Ma, C., and Srebro, N. (2022). Pessimism for offline linear contextual bandits using ℓp

confidence sets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:20974–20987.

Li, L., Lu, Y., and Zhou, D. (2017). Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contextual

bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2071–2080. PMLR.

Liu, D. C. and Nocedal, J. (1989). On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimiza-

tion. Mathematical Programming, 45(1):503–528.

Liu, P., Shi, C., and Sun, W. W. (2024). Dual active learning for reinforcement learning from

human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02504.

Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu,

K. (2016). Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In Balcan, M. F. and Wein-

berger, K. Q., editors, Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning,

volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1928–1937, New York, New York,

USA. PMLR.

34

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A.,

Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. (2015). Human-level control through deep

reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533.

Negahban, S. and Wainwright, M. J. (2011). Estimation of (near) low-rank matrices with noise

and high-dimensional scaling. Annals of statistics, 39(2):1069–1097.

Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal,

S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human

feedback, 2022. URL org/abs/2203.02155, 13:1.

Park, C., Liu, M., Kong, D., Zhang, K., and Ozdaglar, A. (2024). Rlhf from heterogeneous feedback

via personalization and preference aggregation.

Poddar, S., Wan, Y., Ivison, H., Gupta, A., and Jaques, N. (2024).
Personalizing reinforce-

ment learning from human feedback with variational preference learning.
arXiv preprint

arXiv:2408.10075.

Prabhakaran, V., Davani, A. M., and Diaz, M. (2021). On releasing annotator-level labels and

information in datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05699.

Ramesh, S. S., Hu, Y., Chaimalas, I., Mehta, V., Sessa, P. G., Ammar, H. B., and Bo-

gunovic, I. (2024). Group robust preference optimization in reward-free rlhf. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2405.20304.

Rashidinejad, P., Zhu, B., Ma, C., Jiao, J., and Russell, S. (2021). Bridging offline reinforcement

learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information Processing

Systems, 34:11702–11716.

Sallab, A. E., Abdou, M., Perot, E., and Yogamani, S. (2017). Deep reinforcement learning frame-

work for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.02532.

Shi, C., Zhu, J., Shen, Y., Luo, S., Zhu, H., and Song, R. (2024). Off-policy confidence inter-

val estimation with confounded markov decision process. Journal of the American Statistical

Association, 119(545):273–284.

Sidahmed, H., Phatale, S., Hutcheson, A., Lin, Z., Chen, Z., Yu, Z., Jin, J., Komarytsia, R.,

Ahlheim, C., Zhu, Y., et al. (2024). Perl: Parameter efficient reinforcement learning from human

feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10704.

35

Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser,

J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. (2016). Mastering the game of go

with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489.

Stojanovic, S., Jedra, Y., and Proutiere, A. (2024). Model-free low-rank reinforcement learning via

leveraged entry-wise matrix estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23434.

Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi, A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S.,

Bhargava, P., Bhosale, S., et al. (2023). Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.

Tropp, J. A. (2012).
User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices.
Foundations of

Computational Mathematics, 12:389–434.

Wainwright, M. J. (2019). High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48.

Cambridge university press.

Wang, L., Zhang, X., and Gu, Q. (2017). A unified computational and statistical framework for

nonconvex low-rank matrix estimation. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 981–990.

PMLR.

Xia, D. and Yuan, M. (2021). Statistical inferences of linear forms for noisy matrix completion.

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 83(1):58–77.

Zhan, W., Uehara, M., Kallus, N., Lee, J. D., and Sun, W. (2023). Provable offline reinforcement

learning with human feedback. In ICML 2023 Workshop The Many Facets of Preference-Based

Learning.

Zhang, J., Sun, W. W., and Li, L. (2023). Generalized connectivity matrix response regression with

applications in brain connectivity studies. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,

32(1):252–262.

Zheng, Q. and Lafferty, J. (2016). Convergence analysis for rectangular matrix completion using

burer-monteiro factorization and gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07051.

Zhong, H., Deng, Z., Su, W. J., Wu, Z. S., and Zhang, L. (2024). Provable multi-party reinforcement

learning with diverse human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05006.

36

Zhu, B., Jordan, M., and Jiao, J. (2023). Principled reinforcement learning with human feedback

from pairwise or k-wise comparisons. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages

43037–43067. PMLR.

Zhu, Z., Li, X., Wang, M., and Zhang, A. (2022). Learning markov models via low-rank optimiza-

tion. Operations Research, 70(4):2384–2398.

Ziegler, D. M., Stiennon, N., Wu, J., Brown, T. B., Radford, A., Amodei, D., Christiano, P.,

and Irving, G. (2019). Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1909.08593.

Zollo, T. P., Siah, A. W. T., Ye, N., Li, A., and Namkoong, H. (2024). Personalllm: Tailoring llms

to individual preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20296.

37

Supplementary Materials

“Low-Rank Contextual Reinforcement Learning from
Heterogeneous Human Feedback”

This supplement provides additional empirical results, implementation details, additional dis-

cussions, and all technical proofs. In particular, Section S.1 studies the rank estimation of the

proposed low-rank model. Section S.2 presents sensitivity analyses, including robustness to data

splitting and to the choice of the pessimism hyperparameter in the confidence bound. Section S.3

reports runtime results, and Section S.4 discusses several promising future research directions. Sec-

tion S.5 details the implementation of pessimistic policy optimization. Finally, Section S.6 collects

the technical proofs of all supporting lemmas and theorems.

S.1
Rank Estimation

In this section, we study the empirical performance of rank selection for the proposed low-rank

model. Following standard practice, we adopt a generalized information criterion (GIC) (Konishi

and Kitagawa, 1996; Fan and Tang, 2013) to select the rank by balancing goodness of fit and model

complexity. Specifically, for each candidate rank r, we compute the penalized objective defined as:

GIC(r) = Ln(ˆΘr) + an · r(dx + dϕ −r),

where Ln denotes the negative log-likelihood, ˆΘr is the rank-r constrained minimizer of Ln and

an is the penalty parameter. Following Lee et al. (2025), we set an = C · log n/n with C = 0.1 to

ensure consistency of rank selection. We estimate the rank estimation accuracy under the setting

of our simulation studies in Section 5.1, with ds = 20, da = 10, dx = 20 with rank r = 3 and

imbalanced action distribution with parameter 3 and a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries 2.

1

Figure 10 reports the accuracy of the estimated rank as a function of the sample size N. The results

show that the proposed procedure reliably recovers the true rank as the sample size increases.

Figure 10: Accuracy of rank estimation using GIC.

S.2
Sensitivity Analysis

We conduct additional sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of the proposed method to

data splitting and to the choice of the pessimism parameter C2.

S.2.1
Data Split

We examine the sensitivity of the proposed PRS policy to different random splits of the offline

dataset into training and evaluation sets. We use N/N0 ∈{0.2, 0.5, 0.8} and a “No Split” setting

where the entire dataset is used both for subspace estimation and uncertainty quantification in the

reduced space. Similar to our simulation studies in Section 5.1, we use ds = 20, da = 10, dx = 20

with rank r = 3 and imbalance parameter 3.

As shown in Figure 11, the performance of the algorithm is robust to the choice of the data split

ratio provided that N0 = Ω(N). While our theoretical analysis requires N0 and N to be of the same

2

order, empirical results indicate that performance is strongest in the no-split setting. Motivated by

this observation, we adopt the no-split configuration in all subsequent numerical experiments.

Figure 11: Sub-optimality of proposed method under different data splits.

S.2.2
Confidence Bound Hyperparameter

We further conduct a sensitivity analysis on hyperparameters of the confidence bound. The

confidence threshold C is our PRS algorithm is derived from Lemma 1. For practical implemen-

tation, we use the formula C = C2 ·
q

(dx+dϕ)r

N−N0 , where C2 is a hyperparameter. We analyze the

sub-optimality of our proposed method over C2 ∈{1, 5, 10} as shown in Figure 12. When C2 is

too small, the resulting confidence region is overly narrow and the algorithm derives limited benefit

from pessimism; when C2 is too large, excessive pessimism leads to conservative decisions and de-

graded performance. Based on this empirical trade-off, we set C2 = 5 in all numerical experiments.

Importantly, the choice of C2 affects only the finite-sample behavior of the algorithm and does not

alter the theoretical guarantees, which hold up to universal constant factors.

3

Figure 12: Sub-optimality of proposed method under different confidence bound
parameter C2.

S.3
Runtime Analysis

In this section, we report the total runtime of the experiment pipeline in our simulation studies

for representative feature dimensions(dx, dϕ), with the sample size fixed at N = 10, 000 and rank

r = 3. The reported runtime includes data preprocessing, model initialization, and execution of all

compared methods. As summarized in Table 1, the overall runtime increases smoothly with the

feature dimensions and exhibits an approximately linear dependence on both dx and dϕ. These

results indicate that the proposed approach remains computationally feasible and scales favorably

to moderately high-dimensional settings.

dx
dϕ
Time (s)
30
30
≈51.9
30
50
≈83.6
50
50
≈152.7
100
30
≈179.0
100
50
≈251.3

Table 1: Average runtime across varying feature dimensions dx and dϕ.

4

S.4
Future Directions

In this section, we highlight several potential directions for future research. In this work, we

evaluate the value of a policy using the expectation of the preference function over a given distri-

bution. This approach can be extended to optimize more complex social welfare functions, such as

the Nash welfare function or the Leximin welfare function (Zhong et al., 2024). Another promising

direction is the selection of experts and queries, commonly referred to as active learning (Liu et al.,

2024). Furthermore, investigating robustness under model misspecification, potentially building on

recent frameworks for covariate-assisted ranking (Fan et al., 2024b,a), represents an important step

toward ensuring reliability in complex feedback environments. Beyond addressing the heterogeneity

of contexts, it is crucial to consider non-stationary environments, where the underlying distribu-

tions change over time (Bian et al., 2024). These directions offer exciting opportunities to enhance

the robustness and applicability of algorithms in reinforcement learning with human feedback.

S.5
Implementation of Policy Optimization

In this section, we provide details on how to perform the policy optimization on the pessimistic

value function. Note that the pessimistic value function can be simplified:

min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, a) =
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρθ⊤
rtvzrtv(x, s, a)

= ˆθ⊤
rtv

E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)

−
min
∥∆∥W ≤C ∆⊤
E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)


≥ˆθ⊤
rtv

E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)

−
min
∥∆∥W ≤C ∥∆∥W ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)

∥W −1

≥ˆθ⊤
rtv

E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)

−C ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, a)


W −1 .

5

Therefore the pessimistic policy will be


ˆθ⊤
rtv

E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π)

−C ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π)


W −1

.

ˆπ = arg max
π

We can approximate the pessimistic policy by optimizing the relaxed pessimistic reward:


ˆθ⊤
rtv

E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π)

−C · E(x,s)∼ρ [∥zrtv(x, s, π)∥W −1]

.
(S1)

˜π = arg max
π

Note that the pessimistic term is larger by Jensen’s inequality as we now take the expectation of

the norm, instead of the norm of the expectation. Then the approximate policy becomes equivalent

to optimizing per (x, s) pair:


ˆθ⊤
rtvzrtv(x, s, a) −C · ∥zrtv(x, s, a)∥W −1

(S2)

˜π(x, s) = arg max
a∈A

or in the distribution shift framework optimizing with respect to the conditional distribution x|s:


Ex∼ρ|s
h
ˆθ⊤
rtvzrtv(x, s, a) −C · ∥zrtv(x, s, a)∥W −1
i
.

˜π(s) = arg max
a∈A

This is similar to the pessimistic value iteration (PEVI) proposed by Jin et al. (2021).

If we use the relaxed reward (S1) for optimizing the policy, as discussed in Li et al. (2022), the

sub-optimality gap bound will also be loosened to the expectation of the norm, instead of norm of the

expectation. In other words, the concentratability coefficient C∗will be E(x,s)∼ρ ∥zrtv(x, s, π∗)∥W −1

which will provide a loose upper bound.

S.6
Technical Proofs

In this supplement, we provide detailed proofs of the theoretical analysis.

S.6.1 Derivation of the Properties of the Concentratability Coefficient.

6

S.6.2 Estimation Bound for the Low-Rank Optimization: Proof of Theorem 1.

S.6.3 Estimation Bound for the Rotation-Truncation-Vectorization.

S.6.4 Confidence Bound of the reduced parameter: Proof of Lemma 1.

S.6.1
Properties of the Concentratability Coefficient

In this section, we derive the theoretical properties of the concentratability coefficient under

rotation and truncation. Suppose yt = U⊤xt for orthonormal matrix U. Let Σx = P xtx⊤
t and

Σy = P yty⊤
t . Then,

Σy =
X
U⊤xtx⊤
t U = U⊤ΣxU

and therefore, Σy = U⊤Σ−1
x U. Therefore, for y = U⊤x, y⊤Σ−1
y y = x⊤UU⊤Σ−1
x UU⊤x = x⊤Σ−1
x x

and hence, the concentratability coefficient is constant over rotation.

The concentratability coefficient decreases as we remove covariates. Let x⊤= (x⊤
1 , x⊤
2 ). Also

denote







Σ11
Σ12

Σ =
X
xx⊤=


.

Σ21
Σ22

Note that







Σ−1
11·2
−Σ−1
11·2Σ12Σ−1
22

Σ−1 =


,

−Σ−1
22 Σ21Σ−1
11·2
Σ−1
22 + Σ−1
22 Σ21Σ−1
11·2Σ12Σ−1
22

where Σ11·2 = Σ11 −Σ12Σ−1
22 Σ21. Therefore we can verify that

x⊤Σ−1x = x⊤
2 Σ−1
22 x2 + (x1 −Σ12Σ−1
22 x2)⊤Σ−1
11·2(x1 −Σ12Σ−1
22 x2)

≥x⊤
2 Σ−1
22 x2.

7

Moreover note that

vec(U ⊤x(V ⊤ϕ)⊤) = (V ⊤ϕ) ⊗(U⊤x)

= (V ⊤⊗U⊤)(ϕ ⊗x)

= (V ⊗U)⊤(ϕ ⊗x),

where V ⊗U will also be an orthonormal matrix. This indicates rotation on both sides in our

propose RTV will not change the value of the concentratability coefficient.

S.6.2
Proof of Estimation Bound

In this section, we provide the proof of Theorem 3, which is the formal statement of Theorem

1. First, we establish a one-step bound of Algorithm 1 (Lemma 2). Then we verify the conditions

required for the one-step bound such as the restricted strong convexity (RSC) condition and the

bound on the gradient (Lemma 3, 4).
Finally we extend the one-step result to the converged

estimator to complete the proof. First we state the formal estimation bound.

Theorem 3 (Formal Estimation Bound). Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 holds. Then we have the

estimation bound:

s

(3γλmin(V ) + 32 + 16γ) · σ1r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
2σrn

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥F ≤12BxBϕ

γλmin(V )

with probability at least 1 −δ, where V =
1
n0
Pn0
t=1 ztz⊤
t =
1
n0
Pn0
t=1(ϕtϕ⊤
t ) ⊗(xtx⊤
t ).

We begin the proof by re-stating the results on convergence of factored gradient descent algo-

rithm on general loss functions from Zhang et al. (2023). Since the result on Zhang et al. (2023)

is a general result for where the loss is a joint function of a low-rank matrix and a sparse tensor,

we state the simplified result without the assumptions on the tensor portion. First we define the

minimal Frobenius norm under rotation.

8

Definition 1. For Z1, Z2 ∈Rd×r, d(Z1, Z2) is defined as the minimal Frobenius norm between Z1

and Z2 under rotation i.e.,

d(Z1, Z2) = min
R∈Qr ∥Z1 −Z2R∥F ,

where Qr is the space of r-dimensional rotation matrices, i.e., Qr = {R ∈Rr×r : R⊤R = RR⊤=

Ir}.

Next we use the following Lemma to illustrate the one-step rate decrease in terms of the new

metric.

Lemma 2 (Lemma 1 from (Zhang et al., 2023)). Suppose ℓsatisfies the restricted strong convexity

and restricted smoothness i.e., for any matrices Θ1, Θ2 ∈B(Θ∗, 1) with rank at most r,

µ

2 ∥Θ2 −Θ1∥2
F ≤ℓ(Θ2) −ℓ(Θ1) −⟨∇ℓ(Θ1), Θ2 −Θ1⟩≤L

2 ∥Θ2 −Θ1∥2
F .

Let σ1, . . . , σr denote the singular values of Θ∗. Let c1, c2 be a constant such that c1 ≤min{1/32, µ/(192L2)},

min{µ, 2}/(6L + 4) and consider the step size δ = c1/σ1. Let Z∗= [U∗; V ∗], and Z(t) =

c2 ≤
p

[U(t), V (t). If d(Z(t), Z∗) ≤c2
√σ∗r, then Algorithm 1 satisfies

d2(Z(t+1), Z∗) ≤ρd2(Z(t), Z∗) −δµ

4 ∥Θ(t) −Θ∗∥2
F + C1∥∇ℓ(Θ∗)∥2
2,

where ρ = 1 −δµσr/16, C1 = 48rδ2σ1 + 2δ(8r/µ + r/L).

Next step is checking the assumptions of Lemma 2. Note that

|θ⊤zt| ≤∥θ∥2 · ∥zt∥2

= ∥Θ∥F · ∥Zt∥F

= ∥Θ∥F · ∥ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at2)∥2 · ∥xt∥2

≤2BθBϕBx

9

and therefore

1
4V ⪰∇2
θ L(θ) ⪰γV,

where γ = (2 + exp(−2BθBϕBx) + exp(2BθBϕBx))−1 and

n
X

V = 1

t=1
ztz⊤
t

n

n
X

= 1


(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0))(ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0))⊤
⊗(xtx⊤
t )

.

n

t=1

Then we have the following result on the restricted strong convexity and smoothness of the loss

function:

Lemma 3 (Restricted Strong Convexity and Smoothness).

γλmin(V )∥Y −X∥2
F ≤Ln(Y ) −Ln(X) −⟨∇Ln(X), Y −X⟩≤1

4λmax(V )∥Y −X∥2
F ,

where γ :=
exp(2BθBϕBx)
(1+exp(2BθBϕBx))2 is a constant and equivalently X, Y ∈BF (Θ∗, 1).

Next to utilize the result of Lemma 2, we need a bound on the last term of the inequality, the

gradient of the loss function evaluated in the true parameter.

Lemma 4 (Bounded Gradient).

s

log(dx+dϕ

n
X

1
n

≤2BxBϕ


1(yt = 0) −
exp(−θ⊤zt)
1 + exp(−θ⊤zt)

δ
)
n
= ϵ(n, δ)


Zt

t=1

with probability at least 1 −δ.

Plugging in the results of Lemma 3 and 4 to Lemma 2 and since λmax(V ) ≥λmin(V )., we have

the following result on the converged estimator ˆΘ:

10

Corollary 2 (Formal Estimation Bound). If ∥Θ0−Θ∗∥≤c2√σr where c2 ≤
p

min{µ, 2} · (6L + 4),

then:

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤288σ1(3γλmin(V ) + 32 + 16γ) · r log(dx+dϕ

δ
)
4σrγ2λ2
min(V )
B2
xB2
ϕ

or equivalently

s

(3γλmin(V ) + 32 + 16γ) · σ1r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
2σrn
.

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥F ≤12BxBϕ

γλmin(V )

S.6.2.1
Proof of Lemma 3

For proof of Lemma 3, we use Taylor expansion and bounds on the second moment of the loss

function. From the definition of the loss function, We can easily check that

n
X

exp(−θ⊤zt)
(1 + exp(−θ⊤zt))2 ztz⊤
t .

∇2L(θ) = 1

n

t=1

Further note that from the Taylor expansion, we have:

L(Y ) −L(X) −⟨∇L(X), Y −X⟩= (y −x)⊤∇2L(¯¯θ)(y −x),
(S3)

where x = vec(X), y = vec(Y ), ¯θ = cx + (1 −c)y for some c ∈(0, 1). Now assume x, y, ∈B(θ∗, 1),

and assume ∥θ∥2 ≤Bθ for all θ ∈B(θ∗, 1). Then, ∥¯θ∥2 ≤Bθ, so |(¯θ)⊤zt| ≤2BθBϕBx. Then, we

can easily check that

γ :=
exp(2BθBϕBx)
(1 + exp(2BθBϕBx))2 ≤
exp(−(¯θ)⊤zt)
(1 + exp(−(¯θ)⊤zt))2 ≤1

4.

Therefore,

γV ⪯∇2
θL(¯θ) ⪯1

4V.

11

Combined with (S3), we have

γλmin(V )∥Y −X∥2
F ≤L(Y ) −L(X) −⟨∇L(X), Y −X⟩≤1

4λmax(V )∥Y −X∥2
F ,

which completes the proof.

S.6.2.2
Proof of Lemma 4

We use the following Bernstein inequality for rectangular matrices from (Tropp, 2012):

Lemma 5 ((Bernstein Inequality for Rectangular Matrices, Theorem 1.6 of (Tropp, 2012)). Suppose

Mk ∈Rd1×d2 are independent random matrices. Suppose E Mk = 0 and ∥Mk∥2 ≤R almost surely.

Define

(

,

)

σ2 := max

X

X

k
E(MkM⊤
k )

k
E(M⊤
k Mk)

.

Then for all t ≥0,

(

≥t

)

≤(d1 + d2) · exp

−t2/2
σ2 + Rt/3


.

X

P

k
Mk

For brevity, let us denote pt =
1
1+exp(−θ⊤zt) and ϵt = yt −pt. We can easily check that E ϵt = 0.

Denote ϕt = ϕ(st, at1) −ϕ(st, at0) and plug in Mt = ϵtZt to apply Lemma 5.

Now to verify R in the conditions of Lemma 5, note that |ϵt| ≤1 and ∥Zt∥2 = ∥xt(ϕ(st, at1) −

ϕ(st, at2))∥2 ≤2BxBϕ. Therefore we can say R = 2BxBϕ.

Next we verify σ2. Note that:

" n
X

n
X

#

t=1
E MtM⊤
t = E

t=1
ϵ2
t · xtϕ⊤
t ϕtx⊤
t

n
X

t=1
E ϵ2
t ∥ϕt∥2
2 · xtx⊤
t

=

n
X

t=1
pt(1 −pt) · ∥ϕt∥2
2 · xtx⊤
t ,

=

12

since E ϵ2
it = Var(ϵit) = Var(yit) = (E yit)(1−E yit). Also note that ∥xx⊤v∥= |x⊤v|·∥x∥≤∥x∥2·∥v∥,

so ∥xx⊤∥2 = ∥x∥2. Therefore,

n
X

n
X

t=1
E
h
MtM⊤
t
i




2
=

2

t=1
pt(1 −pt)∥ϕt∥2
2 · xtx⊤
t

n
X

≤1

t=1
∥ϕt∥2
2 · ∥xtx⊤
t ∥2

4

n
X

= 1

t=1
∥ϕt∥2
2 · ∥xt∥2
2

4

≤nB2
xB2
ϕ

and similarly we have:

n
X

2
≤nB2
xB2
ϕ.

t=1
E Z⊤
t Zt

Now applying the Lemma 5 with R = 2BxBϕ and σ2 = nB2
xB2
ϕ we have:

n
X

1
n

2
≥t

!

≤(dx + dϕ) exp

−
3nt2


.

P

t=1
Zt

BxBϕ(6BxBϕ + 4t)

9 η, and select t = 2BxBϕ
q

Let η = log dx+dϕ

η
n. Then we

δ
for some δ ∈(0, 1). Assuming n ≥16

have 4t ≤6BxBϕ. Therefore we have

n
X

1
n

2
≥t

!

≤(dx + dϕ) exp

−
3nt2



P

t=1
Zt

BxBϕ(6BxBϕ + 4t)

!

−
12B2
xB2
ϕη

≤(dx + dϕ) exp

12B2xB2
ϕ

≤(dx + dϕ) exp(−η) = δ.

Therefore,





1
n

s

log(dx+dϕ

n
X

2
≤2BxBϕ

δ
)
n
= ϵ(n, δ),

t=1
(yt −pt)ϕtx⊤
t

13

with probability at least 1 −δ. This completes the proof of Lemma 4.

S.6.2.3
Proof of Corollary 2

Before moving on to the main proof of Corollary 2, we first state the modified result from (Wang

et al., 2017) and Lemma 2.

Proposition 1. For i = 1, 2,, let Ui ∈Rd1×r, Vi ∈Rd2×r and Xi = UiV ⊤
i . Now denote











U1



U2

Z1 =


,
Z2 =


.

V1

V2

Then,

∥X1 −X2∥2
F ≤2(∥Z2∥2 + d(Z1, Z2))2d2(Z1, Z2).

Proof. Note that for two positive definite matrices A, B with eigenvalue decomposition A = PΛP ⊤

and B = QDQ⊤,

tr(AB) = tr(PΛP ⊤QDQ⊤)

= tr(Q⊤PΛP ⊤QD)
(∵tr(AB) = tr(BA))

≤tr(Q⊤PΛP ⊤Q) · ∥D∥2

= tr(Λ) · ∥D∥2

= tr(A) · ∥B∥2.

This implies:

∥AB∥2
F = tr(ABB⊤A⊤)

= tr(BB⊤A⊤A)

≤tr(BB⊤)∥A⊤A∥2

14

= ∥B∥2
F ∥A∥2
2

and therefore ∥AB∥F ≤∥B∥F ∥A∥2. Now consider R ∈Qr. Note that:

∥U1(V1 −V2R)⊤∥2
F = tr(U1(V1 −V2R)⊤(V1 −V2R)U⊤
1 )

= tr((V1 −V2R)⊤(V1 −V2R)U⊤
1 U1)

≤∥U⊤
1 U1∥2 · tr((V1 −V2R)⊤(V1 −V2R))

= ∥U1∥2
2∥V1 −V2R∥2
F .

Similarly we have ∥(U1 −U2R)R⊤V ⊤
2 ∥2
F ≤∥V2∥2
2∥U1 −U2R∥2
F . Now note that for arbitrary vector

v,

∥Ziv∥2
2 = ∥Uiv∥2
2 + ∥Viv∥2
2 ≥∥Uiv∥2
2.

So we have ∥Zi∥2 ≥∥Ui∥2 and similarly ∥Zi∥2 ≥∥Vi∥2. Now note that:

∥Z1∥2 ≤∥Z1 −Z2R∥2 + ∥Z2R∥2

= ∥Z1 −Z2R∥2 + ∥Z2∥2
(∵R ∈Qr)

≤∥Z1 −Z2R∥F + ∥Z2∥2.
(∵∥A∥2 ≤∥A∥F )

And this holds for arbitrary R ∈Qr. Therefore,

∥Z1∥2 ≤∥Z2∥2 + d(Z1, Z2).
(S4)

Therefore we have:

∥X1 −X2∥2
F = ∥U1V ⊤
1 −U2V ⊤
2 ∥2
F

15

= ∥U1V ⊤
1 −U1R⊤V ⊤
2 + U1R⊤V ⊤
2 −U2RR⊤V ⊤
2 ∥2
F

≤(∥U1(V1 −V2R)⊤∥F + ∥(U1 −U2R)R⊤V ⊤
2 ∥F )2

≤2(∥U1(V1 −V2R)⊤∥2
F + ∥(U1 −U2R)R⊤V ⊤
2 ∥2
F )
(∵(a + b)2 ≤2(a2 + b2))

≤2(∥V2∥2
2∥U1 −U2R∥2
F + ∥U1∥2
2∥V1 −V2R∥2
F )
(∵∥AB∥2
F ≤∥A∥F ∥B∥2)

≤2(∥Z2∥2
2∥U1 −U2R∥2
F + ∥Z1∥2
2∥V1 −V2R∥2
F )

≤2(∥Z2∥2 + d(Z1, Z2))2(∥U1 −U2R∥2
F + ∥V1 −V2R∥2
F )
(∵(S4)

= 2(∥Z2∥2 + d(Z1, Z2))2∥Z1 −Z2R∥2
F .

Since this holds for arbitrary R ∈Qr, The statement holds.

Now we can finally prove Corollary 2.

Proof. Assume d(Z(0), Z∗) ≤κ1 and C1ϵ(n, δ) ≤(1 −ρ)κ1. Then by induction and using Lemma

2, we can check that d(Z(t), Z∗) ≤κ1 for every t ≥0. Also we have:

d2(Z(t), Z∗) ≤ρtd2(Z(0), Z∗) + C1(1 −ρt)

1 −ρ
ϵ2(n, δ)

≤ρtκ2
1 +
C1
1 −ρϵ2(n, δ).

Note that for unit vector v ∈Rr with ∥v∥2 = 1,

2







U∗v

∥Z∗v∥2
2 =




V ∗v

2

= ∥U∗v∥2
2 + ∥V ∗v∥2
2

≤∥U∗∥2
2 + ∥V ∗∥2
2

= 2∥Θ∗∥2.

16

2∥Θ∗∥2 = √2σ1. Using Proposition 1, we have:

Therefore ∥Z∗∥2 ≤
p

∥Θ(t) −Θ∗∥2
F ≤2(
√

2σ1 + d(Z(t), Z∗))2d2(Z(t), Z∗)

≤(4σ1 + 2d2(Z(t), Z∗))d2(Z(t), Z∗).
(∵(a + b)2 ≤2(a2 + b2))

As t →∞, we have:

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤

4σ1 + 2C1

1 −ρϵ2(n, δ)

·
C1
1 −ρϵ2(n, δ).

Now assume ϵ2(n, δ) ≤5(1−ρ)σ1

2C1
. Then we have:

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤9σ1C1

1 −ρ ϵ2(n, δ).

Now note that C1 = r(48δ2σ1 + 2δ(8/µ + 1/L)). So we have:


48δ2σ1 + 2δ
8


rϵ2(n, δ).

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤9σ1

µ + 1

1 −ρ

L

Plugging in the values of δ = c1/σ1 and ρ = 1 −δµσr/16 we have:


24c1 + 8


rϵ2(n, δ).

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤9σ1 · 32

µ + 1

µσr

L

Now note that the constants are defined as:

µ = γλmin(V )

L = 1

4λmax(V )

s

log(dx+dϕ

δ
)
n
BxBϕ

ϵ(n, δ) =

17

c1 ≤min
1


≤1

32,
µ
192L2

32.

Plugging in the values we achieve:


r · log(dx+dϕ

δ
)
n
B2
xB2
ϕ

σr
·
n
γλmin(V ) ·

24c1 +
8
γλmin(V ) +
4
λmax(V )

∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F ≤288σ1

r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
λmin(V )
B2
xB2
ϕ.

σr · γ ·
3

= 288σ1

4 +
8
γλmin(V ) +
4
λmax(V )

Plugging in λmax(V ) ≥λmin(V ) completes the proof.

S.6.3
Estimation Error from Rotation-Truncation-Vectorization

Here we show the estimation bound of “rotation-truncation” with respect to the estimated

subspace. Consider the following Lemma from Jun et al. (2019).

Lemma 6 (Wedin’s sinΘ theorem, Appendix B of (Jun et al., 2019)). Let ˆΘ = [ ˆU, ˆU⊥] ˆD[ ˆV , ˆV⊥]⊤

and Θ∗= U∗D∗V ∗be the SVD of ˆΘ and Θ∗. Then,

∥ˆU⊤
⊥U∗∥F ∥ˆV ⊤
⊥V ∗∥F ≤∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F
σ∗2
r
,

where σ∗
k is the k-th(smallest) eigenvalue of Θ∗.

Now let Θ∗
r = ˆUΘ∗ˆV ⊤be the rotated true parameter with respect to the estimated subspace

ˆU, ˆV . Let (Θ∗
r)22 denote the lower right (dx −r) × (dϕ −r) sub-matrix of Θ∗
r. Then we have

∥(Θ∗
r)22∥F ≤∥ˆU⊥U∥F ∥ˆV⊥V ∥F · ∥D∗∥2 ≤σ∗
1
σ∗2
r
∥ˆΘ −Θ∗∥2
F .

18

Combining this with our estimation bound from Theorem 1, we have

∥(Θ∗
r)22∥F ≤C2 · σ2
1r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
σ3rn0
=: S⊥.
(S5)

With this result, we can derive the estimation bound of ˆθrtv with respect to the semi-norm

∥· ∥W , which is used to define the confidence set of Algorithm 2.

S.6.4
Proof of Lemma 1

Consider the function

n
X

!

1
1 + exp(−z⊤
t,rtvθrtv) −
1
1 + exp(−⟨Zt, Θ∗⟩)

zt,rtv.

J(θrtv) =

t=1

Further consider the likelihood function on the reduced space:

n
X

Lrtv(θrtv) = 1


log

1 + exp(−z⊤
t,rtvθrtv))

+ (1 −yt)z⊤
t,rtvθrtv)


n

t=1

Note that the gradient will be:

n
X

1
1 + exp(−z⊤
t,rtvθrtv) −yt

!

∇Lrtv(θrtv) = 1

zt,rtv.

n

t=1

So for the minimizer ˆθrtv of Lrtv, we have ∇Lrtv(ˆθrtv) = 0. Therefore, J(ˆθrtv) = Pn
t=1 ϵtzt,rtv

where ϵt = yt −E yt. Let V ∈Rn be a vector with ϵt as its components, and let X ∈Rn×k be a

matrix with zt,rtv as its rows. Then, J(ˆθrtv) = X⊤V .

Therefore,

∥J(ˆθrtv)∥W −1 = V ⊤(XW −1X⊤)V =: V ⊤MV

19

and we can easily check that tr(M) ≤nk, tr(M2) ≤n2k and ∥M∥≤n. Using Berstein’s inequality

for sub-Gaussian random variables in quadratic form (Hsu et al., 2012), we have

∥J(ˆθrtv)∥2
W −1 = V ⊤MV ≤C1 · n · (k + log(1/δ)).

Now note that

n
X

t=1
(Φ(z⊤
t,rtvθ∗
rtv) −Φ(⟨Zt, Θ∗⟩))zt,rtv,

J(θ∗
rtv) =

where Φ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x). Also note that |Φ′(x)| = e−x/(1 + e−x)2 ≤1

4. Therefore,

Φ(z⊤
t,rtvθ∗
rtv) −Φ(⟨Zt, Θ∗⟩) ≤1

4|z⊤
t,rtvθ∗
rtv −⟨Zt, Θ∗⟩|

≤1

4|⟨(Zt,r)22, (Θ∗
r)22⟩|

≤1

4∥Zt∥F · ∥(Θ∗
r)22∥F

≤1

2BxBϕ · S⊥

and

v
u
u
t

!⊤
W −1
n
X

n
X

!

∥J(θ∗
rtv)∥W −1 ≤1

2BxBϕ · S⊥·

t=1
|zt,rtv|

t=1
|zt,rtv|

2BxBϕ · S⊥· n
√

≤1

k

as



!⊤

!⊤
·

!−1 X

!−1 X

X

1
n

!

1
n

! X

X

X

i
ziz⊤
i

i
ziz⊤
i

i
zi

i
zi

= tr

i
zi

i
zi







!

!−1
· n ·

1
n

X

X

i
ziz⊤
i

i
ziz⊤
i

≤tr





= n2k.

20

Also note that

Lrtv(ˆθrtv) −Lrtv(θ∗
rtv) −⟨∇Lrtv(θ∗
rtv), ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv⟩

=(ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv)⊤∇2Lrtv(¯θrtv)(ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv)

n
X

≥(ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv)⊤· γ

t=1
zt,rtvz⊤
t,rtv(ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv)

n ·

=γ · ∥ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv∥2
W ,

where W = X⊤X. Also note that Lrtv(ˆθrtv) ≤Lrtv(θ∗
rtv). Therefore,

γ · ∥ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv∥2
W ≤|⟨∇Lrtv(θ∗
rtv), ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv⟩| ≤∥∇Lrtv(θ∗
rtv)∥W −1 · ∥ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv∥W

and

∥ˆθrtv −θ∗
rtv∥W ≤1

γ ∥∇Lrtv(θ∗
rtv)∥W −1

= 1

nγ ∥J(ˆθrtv) −J(θ∗
rtv)∥W −1

≤1


∥J(ˆθrtv)∥W −1 + ∥J(θ∗
rtv)∥W −1


nγ

r

!

2BxBϕ · S⊥·
√

≤1

C1 · k + log(1/δ)

n
+ 1

k

γ

which completes the proof.

S.6.5
Proof of Theorem 2

The key idea of the proof of Theorem 2 is decomposing the sub-optimality gap into three parts.

For brevity, let us denote rθ(x, s, π(x, s)) as rθ(x, s, π). Now define the pessimistic value function

21

ˆJ as:

ˆJ(π) :=
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, π).

Then the proposed pessimistic policy ˆπ is given as: ˆπ := arg maxπ ˆJ(π). Let us first consider the

individualized policy where each policy is given in the form of π(x, s). Note that the sub optimality

gap can be decomposed as sum of three differences:

J(π∗) −J((ˆπ) = J(π∗) −ˆJ(π∗) + ˆJ(π∗) −ˆJ(ˆπ) + ˆJ(ˆπ) −J(ˆπ).

By the definition of ˆπ, the second difference satisfies ˆJ(π∗) −ˆJ(ˆπ) ≤0. Further note that for

arbitrary x, s, a,

rΘ∗(x, s, a) −rθ∗
rtv(x, s, a)
≤S⊥· ∥zrtv∥≤BxBϕS⊥.

Then conditioned on ∥θ∗
rtv −ˆθrtv∥W ≤C, the third difference satisfies:

ˆJ(ˆπ) −J(ˆπ) =
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, ˆπ) −E(x,s)∼ρrΘ∗(x, s, ˆπ)

≤BxBϕS⊥+
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, ˆπ) −E(x,s)∼ρrθ∗
rtv(x, s, ˆπ)

≤BxBϕS⊥.

As for the first difference:

J(π∗) −ˆJ(π∗) = E(x,s)∼ρrΘ∗(x, s, π∗) −
min
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρrθrtv(x, s, π∗)

≤BxBϕS⊥+
max
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
E(x,s)∼ρ

rθ∗
rtv(x, s, π∗) −rθrtv(x, s, π∗)



(θ∗
rtv −θrtv)⊤E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


= BxBϕS⊥+
max
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C

22

≤BxBϕS⊥+
max
∥θrtv−ˆθrtv∥W ≤C
∥θ∗
rtv −ˆθrtv∥W ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


W −1

≤BxBϕS⊥+ 2C ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


W −1 .

Combining these results, we have the bound

J(π∗) −J(ˆπ) ≤2BxBϕS⊥+ 2C ·


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


W −1

with probability at least 1−δ. Denote C∗=


E(x,s)∼ρzrtv(x, s, π∗)


W −1. Plugging in the confidence

bound on C from Lemma 1, we have





s

2BxBϕ · S⊥·
√

J(π∗) −J(ˆπ) ≤2BxBϕS⊥+ 2C∗

C3 · k + log(1/δ)

N1
+ 1

.

k



γ

Note that we have a bound on S⊥given as:

S⊥= C2 · σ2
1r log( dx+dϕ

δ
)
σ3rN0

from (5). Plugging in n0 = Ω(√n) gives us the optimality gap rate





s

(dx + dϕ) · r + log(1/δ)

J(π∗) −J(ˆπ) = O

C∗·

.

N −N0

Now assuming N1 = N −N0 = Ω(N) (For example, N0 = N/2), we have the optimal rate in

Theorem 2.

23