Rudrajit Choudhuri∗, Ambareesh Ramakrishnan∗, Amreeta Chatterjee∗, Bianca Trinkenreich∗,
Igor Steinmacher†, Marco Gerosa†, Anita Sarma∗

∗Oregon State University, United States, {choudhru, ramakria, chattera, bianca.trinkenreich,
†Northern Arizona University, United States, {igor.steinmacher,

comprehending a solution provided by genAI and creating a
solution through personal, mental effort. Using genAI reduces
students’ problem-solving and critical thinking into a mere
reading comprehension exercise [20], undermining metacog-
nition, the very essence of the learning process.
Yet, considering a complete “ban” or forbidding students
from using genAI tools is impractical [21], as these tools are
already widely adopted [6, 22]. Further, with the software in-
dustry’s exuberant adoption of genAI, proficiency with genAI
has become a necessary job skill for the future workforce
[23, 24]. Acknowledging the inevitability of some instances
of academic misconduct [25], the emphasis should thus shift
towards guiding students on the effective use of genAI. Educa-
tors and policymakers aligned with this thought are speculating
on the incorporation of genAI into curricula and pedagogy in
the long term [21, 26, 7], seeking a clear landscape of where
these tools can help or hinder. Prior research has explored the
potential benefits and challenges of genAI usage from both
student [27, 28, 29] and educator [21, 27, 30, 31] perspectives.
However, there is a dearth in understanding the current state
of genAI usage among SE students: when and how they use
genAI, where they are finding benefits or facing challenges,
and why these challenges exist. Without answers to these
questions, we will not know how to effectively integrate genAI
into (SE) education without risking adverse impacts.
In this paper, we investigate: (RQ1): What is the current
state of genAI usage among SE students? Through reflective
interviews with 16 SE students, validated through member
checking and interviews with two instructors, we elicit stu-
dents’ experiences of genAI usage to complement learning
of SE concepts and their implementations in SE courses. We
explored the specific contexts when students turn to genAI
tools, examining how they incorporate these tools in their
work, and where they face benefits and challenges.
Furthermore, to gain a deeper understanding of the appro-
priateness of genAI tools for supporting SE students, it is
essential to identify why students face challenges when using
these tools. This led to our second research question: (RQ2):
What are the causes and consequences of the challenges
faced by SE students? Qualitative analysis of student expe-
riences revealed six intrinsic categories of issues (faults and
gaps) within genAI itself, which contributed to five categories
of student challenges. These challenges ultimately impacted
students’ learning and task outcomes, self-perception, and
willingness to adopt genAI technology.

Abstract—Generative AI (genAI) tools (e.g., ChatGPT, Copilot)
have become ubiquitous in software engineering (SE). As SE
educators, it behooves us to understand the consequences of
genAI usage among SE students and to create a holistic view
of where these tools can be successfully used. Through 16
reflective interviews with SE students, we explored their academic
experiences of using genAI tools to complement SE learning
and implementations. We uncover the contexts where these
tools are helpful and where they pose challenges, along with
examining why these challenges arise and how they impact
students. We validated our findings through member checking
and triangulation with instructors. Our findings provide practical
considerations of where and why genAI should (not) be used in
the context of supporting SE students.
Index Terms—Empirical Study, Generative AI, Challenges and
Benefits, Software Engineering Education, Human-AI Interaction

arXiv:2412.15624v1 [cs.HC] 20 Dec 2024

I. INTRODUCTION

Generative AI (genAI) tools (e.g., ChatGPT [1], Gemini [2],
Copilot [3]) have asserted their prevalence over a couple of
years. These tools are widely used in software development as
well as education [4, 5, 6]. Thus, it behooves us as educators
to understand how and where to incorporate genAI to train the
next generation of AI-savvy SE workforce [7, 8].
However, how to seamlessly incorporate genAI use by SE
students without long-lasting adverse effects is a non-trivial
question. There are intense debates about the appropriateness
of students using genAI in their learning processes [9]. Some
argue that this marks the end of traditional education [10, 11]
and fear that the future workforce will lack essential skills,
such as problem-solving, due to over-reliance on AI tools [12,
13]. The counterargument is that it is not all negative; there are
opportunities despite the risks [14, 15, 9, 16] and “it depends”
on how these tools are being used.
The concerns raised by the former group are serious.
First, genAI systems are not infallible. They are trained on
available (sometimes biased or incomplete) data, and function
by predicting the most likely sequence of symbols, without
guaranteeing the veracity of information [17, 18]. The convinc-
ing nature of genAI responses, even when it is hallucinating
[19], can foster over-reliance among novices [12, 13], who
might not have the relevant knowledge to assess the accuracy
of its responses. Second, a deeper concern is that genAI will
stymie learning: not only for the ones who want to bypass
learning, seeking ready-made answers instead of engaging
with the material; but also for the ones who actually want to
learn. This is because of the fundamental difference between

II. RELATED WORK

User studies with genAI: Research on genAI-based pro-
gramming tools [32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39] has shown
their usefulness and limitations. Vaithilingam et al. [36] found
programmers faced more difficulties completing tasks with
GitHub Copilot compared to traditional autocomplete, al-
though with no significant effects on task completion time.
Barke et al. [32] investigated programmers’ interaction with
Copilot identifying exploration (using genAI for planning) and
acceleration (using genAI to speed up code authoring) interac-
tion modes. They observed that over-reliance on Copilot can
lead to increased cognitive load. Bird et al. [40] studied how
developers who were first-time Copilot users, engaged with
it. They found that developers accepted generated suggestions
for efficiency, trading autonomy and control over code. Other
studies [22, 38] focused on programmers’ perceptions, with
Liang et al. [22] finding appreciation for autocomplete features
but concerns over code quality, control, and IP risks. While
these studies offer insights into user perception of genAI tools,
their findings primarily apply to professional programmers.
Closest to our work is the study by Choudhuri et al. [19].
They investigated the effectiveness and pitfalls of ChatGPT in
supporting students in SE tasks. Their findings highlight that
using ChatGPT had no significant improvements in productiv-
ity, although it significantly increased participants’ frustration.
Further, they investigated the causes and consequences of
AI faults arising from human-AI interaction guideline [41]
violations, leading to negative consequences for students using
ChatGPT for SE implementations.
(+) In contrast to these studies, our study did not control or
focus on specific tasks or genAI tools. We complement their
findings by concentrating on student challenges and presenting
associations between their causes and implications across the
SE learning and implementation phases.
GenAI in education: Previous research has examined the
use of genAI tools in education, with research investigating
both the opportunities and challenges these AI tools present
[14, 15, 9, 21, 30, 42, 43]. This included advantages, impact
on teaching methods due to readily available solutions, and
concerns over plagiarism, biases, and fostering detrimental
habits among students. In work exploring the opportunities and
risks presented by these tools, Bommasani et al.[13] explicitly
list Copilot as a challenge for educators, stating students’ over-
reliance may negatively impact their learning. How students

III. METHOD

We conducted semi-structured interviews with software en-
gineering (SE) students to elicit their academic experiences
with genAI. See supplemental [56] for the interview script.

A. Interview Planning

Script design: Learning is a continuous process that begins
with acquiring and understanding knowledge and progresses
to applying and synthesizing that knowledge in new contexts

Interviews were conducted remotely through Zoom, adher-
ing to the university’s IRB protocol. Before their participation,
participants agreed to an IRB-approved informed consent. The
sessions were audio-recorded and lasted around an hour each.
The first author transcribed the interviews.
Participants: We initially invited 28 students who met
our selection criteria, inquiring about their availability for
participation. Out of these, 19 confirmed their availability.
However, three students withdrew, leading to a final count of
16 participants: 10 self-identified as men, five as women, and
one as non-binary or gender diverse. In subsequent sections,
participants are denoted as P1-P16. Their demographics are
summarized in Table I. As a token of appreciation, students
received a $20 Amazon gift card.

TABLE I
PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHICS (N=16)

Attribute
N
Percentage

Gender

Men
10
62.5%
Women
5
31.3%
Non-Binary or Gender Diverse
1
6.3%

Academic Level

Junior
4
25.0%
Senior
12
75.0%

GenAI Used

ChatGPT
16
100.0%
Gemini/Bard
5
31.2%
Copilot
4
25.0%

Qualitative analysis: We analyzed the data using reflexive
thematic analysis [63, 64] to discern patterns and meanings
within it. We used Atlas.ti [65] to facilitate this process,
which involved an iterative method of adjusting codes, e.g.,
merging and splitting them, as our understanding of the data
deepened and themes began to emerge. To ensure reliability
in our analysis, we held multiple team meetings over seven
weeks. During these sessions, the authors critically compared
and contrasted the codes and discussed the differences, as
advocated for in thematic analysis [62, 66]. Our themes are
an output of the analysis process rather than an input, as
occurs in other forms of qualitative analysis. In more detail,
we proceeded as follows:
Two authors inductively open-coded the data, identifying
preliminary codes. Subsequent team meetings were dedicated
to refining these codes as a shared understanding of the data
developed. As the analysis progressed, the authors built post-
formed codes and associated them with respective parts of
the interview transcripts, following a negotiated agreement.
Iterative adjustments to the code set and the interview script
were made as necessary. Next, we compared and contrasted the
codes, merging (or splitting) them as required. A key aspect
of this step was determining the granularity of the codes,
which was achieved by analyzing co-occurrences: codes that
frequently appeared together were merged; otherwise, they
remained separate. During this process, codes with logical
connections were grouped into higher-level categories.

Table II presents exemplary concepts and course contents
corresponding to each of these phases, as provided by the
course instructors. This can help readers relate our subsequent
findings from an SE curriculum perspective. For clarity and
ease of reference throughout this paper, we will use the
abbreviations L1, L2, I1, and I2 to refer to these phases.

TABLE II
SE COURSE CONTENTS CORRESPONDING TO DIFFERENT PHASES OF SE
LEARNING AND IMPLEMENTATIONS

Introductory/Intermediate
Senior/Capstone

L1
Version control systems, APIs and
microservices, UI design principles,
User stories, Scrum practices (e.g.
sprints, backlogs), Code review

Project requirement analysis, Archi-
tectural patterns (MVC, MVVM),
System design and scaling, SE best
practices (code, documentation, re-
view)

L2
Advanced Git features (e.g. merg-
ing, rebasing, resolving conflicts),
RESTful services, HTTP methods,
Code smells, Software design, Soft-
ware process models (principles,
roles)

Designing API gateways, Linters,
Application performance monitor-
ing, Software security, OAuth, Code
performance optimization, System
integration testing

I1
Setting up frameworks and environ-
ments,
Dependency
management,
UI development (HTML, CSS, JS),
Third party API integration, Unit
tests

Software
prototyping
(design
choices,
core
functionalities),
Environment
configuration
for
multiple service support, Setting
automated test frameworks

IV. GENERATIVE AI USAGE AMONG SE STUDENTS (RQ1)
In this section, we map the current usage of genAI amongst
SE students, identifying WHEN and HOW students use genAI
to complement their SE learning and implementations, along
with WHERE they perceive benefits and challenges.
A. When do SE students use genAI?
We explicitly inquired about students’ use of genAI for
learning and implementation phases. When analyzing their
answers, we identified that each phase can be divided into
two, as presented below.
Learning (Initial - L1) corresponded to situations where
participants used genAI to learn SE concepts from scratch,
without any prior knowledge. Participants mentioned using
genAI tools to get definitions and a basic understanding of SE
concepts. For example, P9 “asked genAI to tell what fuzzing
is and what its purpose was.”
Learning (Incremental - L2) is characterized by situations
when participants, after having some background knowledge,
used genAI to “refine understanding and tie up loose ends”
(P5). P2 mentioned that genAI was useful for “clarifying
sprint and agile concepts that were confusing in the lecture”
(P2).
Implementation (Initial - I1) involved participants’ en-
gagement with genAI during the initial stages of software
implementations. They reported instances of using genAI to
“whip up boilerplates” (P15), set up frameworks, and assess
code rundowns. P10 elaborated, “I used ChatGPT for setting
up a quick react framework and got rundowns of structure and
content of the code”.
Implementation (Advanced - I2) corresponded to scenar-
ios when participants used genAI to complement contributions

I2
Building
microservices,
Testing
frameworks,
Integration
and
end2end
tests,
Inter-process
communication,
Term
project,
Code reviews, PRs and issues

Software deployment (GH pages,
AWS),
Maintenance
routines,
CI/CD,
Manage
code
conflicts
across git branches, Term project

B. How do they use it?

During the learning phase, participants described four ways
in which they used genAI to support their learning.
1) Role-based prompting involves instructing genAI sys-
tems to assume a specific role (e.g., a teaching assistant) or
to explain concepts to a particular type of audience (e.g., a
child). Participants mentioned that they prompted genAI tools
to simplify complex concepts by requesting explanations in
layman’s terms or asking it to “explain things to a child”
(P8). Further, participants gave tutoring roles to genAI to get
deeper explanations on topics. For example, P2 shared, “I used
to often ask ChatGPT and Gemini to pretend to be my TA for
the class, pretending I’m a complete novice” (P2).
2) Using AI as an advanced search engine allowed
participants to filter and “narrow down the search space”
(P12), pinpointing information for the topic of interest. For
example, P9 mentioned, “I used to ask ChatGPT to get a basic
idea of what all I needed to learn. If it gave me 3 things, I
would then look up and read about those things”.
3) Combining AI responses with other sources allowed
for a more complete understanding. Participants considered
genAI to be “not really good at giving the complete answer”
(P16). They mentioned combining AI responses with other
sources such as Youtube (P16), Stack Overflow (P9), for a
better understanding of SE concepts, instead of solely relying
on genAI-provided explanations.

C2. Difficulty in effectively communicating

Clarifying concepts and code

Getting practice problems ?

C1.Unclear understanding of genAI & its use

needs or context

- Ethical dilemma
- Setting realistic expectations

- Framing the right questions or prompts
- Communicating context ?
- Need for domain knowledge to query AI ?
- Multiple back and forth exchanges

Getting structured outlines and

roadmaps
Getting surface level understanding

C3. Difficulty in aligning AI to process or

preferences

C5. Difficulty in appropriately using genAI

Learning syntax ?
Obtaining descriptive examples ?

responses

- Hard to align with learning style ?

- Hard to verify AI responses
- Misleading or confusing responses
- Hard to adapt AI to needs

C4. Issues in obtaining proper rationales

Personalized support
Revising concepts ?

behind genAI's responses

Initial Implementation (I1)

Advanced Implementation (I2)

Unclear understanding of genAI and its use

Unclear understanding of genAI and its use

C2. Difficulty in effectively communicating

Brainstorming ideas ?

Clarifying concepts and code

C1.Unclear understanding of genAI & its use

needs or context

- Ethical dilemma
- Setting realistic expectations
- Gauging genAI's limitations ?

- Framing the right questions or prompts
- Multiple back and forth exchanges

Comprehending code snippets ?
Finding useful resources ?

C3. Difficulty in aligning AI to process or

C5. Difficulty in appropriately using genAI

preferences

responses

Getting structured outlines and

roadmaps
Getting surface level understanding

- Hard to align AI to preferences ?
- Interrupts thought processes ?

- Hard to verify AI responses
- Misleading or confusing responses
- Hard to adapt AI to needs
- Hard to modify or generalize AI responses ?

C4. Issues in obtaining proper rationales

Obtaining initial guidance ?
Personalized support

behind genAI's responses

Fig. 1. Perceived benefits and challenges of genAI usage among students: Benefits were in incremental learning (L2) & initial implementations
(I1), with challenges in initial learning (L1) & advanced implementations (I2). Stars indicate perceptions unique to the quadrant.

4) Using course materials to query AI enabled participants
to ask focused questions to refine or expand on their knowl-
edge. For instance, P4 described, “I get familiarized with the
jargon using class resources, and then come back to GPT and
ask specific questions. I then use that knowledge to learn the
concept and then apply it for my problem”.
Participants reported using genAI tools for supporting im-
plementations in three distinct ways.
1) Using AI to improve own or obtained code: Participants
used genAI tools to refine their code (or the ones retrieved
from other sources), for better performance and compliance
with best practices. P1 explained, “When dealing with a
problem, I use generative AI to optimize the solutions I have
built. I ask it for the recommended best practices or industry-
standard approach for this type of problem”.
2) Using AI for code snippets and organizing it on their
own: Participants highlighted their use of genAI to acquire
code components or “pieces of the puzzle”, as P10 puts it,
which they then organize into cohesive solutions for their
projects. P3 shared, “I lean towards using genAI for individual
parts that I planned dealing with in my project, that’s where
I think its value comes from...I can take those pieces and
organize it to fit them into my project”.
3) Combining AI-generated code with traditional sources:
Participants blended genAI-generated code with insights from
traditional sources, like online documentation (P3), Google
searches (P7), and forums such as Stack Overflow (P15), to
craft effective solutions. This approach mirrors the combina-
tion of AI responses with other sources for learning concepts.
P15 described this approach: “for me, the development cycle is
to start with ChatGPT, refine it with documentation or specific
Stack Overflow examples to fill the portions it missed”.
C. Perceived benefits and challenges
Figure 1 presents an overview of the benefits and challenges
perceived by SE students in using genAI tools, highlighting the

specific phases in which these perceptions arise. Participants
perceived the benefits of using genAI only for incremental
learning (L2) and initial implementation tasks (I1). Conversely,
they encountered challenges when using genAI for initial
learning (L1) and advanced implementations (I2).
BENEFITS: Interviewees valued genAI tools both in in-
cremental learning (L2) and initial implementations (I1) for
its ability to provide personalized support and clarify con-
cepts and code. One participant mentioned that “if I need a
clearer explanation of a topic from class or if I am stuck
with something in my code, I definitely turn to generative
AI for a personalized explanation” (P12). Moreover, genAI
was valued for providing surface level understanding and
structured outlines or roadmaps which aided in identifying
key topics or areas of focus. P3 shared, “I find myself leaning
more and more on genAI tools to get structured outlines and
to know what information I need to gather”.
In the incremental learning phase (L2), genAI proved ben-
eficial for revising concepts: “ChatGPT can help in brushing
up or polishing concepts if you have a basic understanding
of it” (P14) and obtaining descriptive examples: “you can
ask generative AI to give you an example or demonstrate
what you’re asking about in practice, which is helpful” (P3).
Participants also perceived these tools to be useful for getting
practice problems to enhance their understanding of a topic. P1
highlighted, “I would also ask for incrementally challenging
practice problems with a topic. It helped me have a practical
understanding”. Moreover, these tools were useful for learn-
ing syntax, when participants had a programming background:
“GenAI was useful when I needed to learn a particular JS
syntax. I could understand what it said because I already knew
how to program in JS” (P13).
Interviewees also valued genAI tools during the initial im-
plementations (I1) phase, particularly for comprehending code
snippets, brainstorming ideas, and finding useful resources. P4

Instructors largely confirmed these benefits, with the ex-
ception of the value of “personalized support”, where they
emphasized that “AI doesn’t always get the context right
or understand learning goals, making personalized [support]
double-edged, it is risky when students build too much on
flawed help” (Capstone Instructor).

CHALLENGES: Interviewees highlighted various challenges
in using genAI tools as complete beginners learning SE
concepts (L1) and in tackling complex implementations (I2).
These challenges can be organized into five main cate-
gories. First, participants reported challenges in understanding
genAI’s limitations and identifying its appropriate and eth-
ical applications (C1). They found it difficult to effectively
communicate their needs or context to the AI (C2) and to
align it with their process or preferences (C3). They also faced
obstacles in obtaining clear rationales for the genAI responses
(C4) and applying them appropriately (C5).
These categories were identified in both the L1 (initial learn-
ing) and I2 (advanced implementation) phases, with specific
challenges occurring in either phase or spanning both. For
clarity, we outline these distinctions in Figure 1 and proceed
to explain the categories in the text:
C1) Unclear understanding of genAI and its use: Par-
ticipants reported difficulties understanding genAI’s limita-
tions and gauging its appropriate applications in software
engineering. For example, they struggled to determine the
ethical use of genAI in SE: “I don’t know whether it is
ethical to use generative AI for actual implementations” (P10),
indicating moral ambiguity surrounding the tool’s use. Setting
realistic expectations is another hurdle reported by our sample.
Participants’ high expectations often clashed with genAI’s
actual capabilities, leading to dissatisfaction. P14’s experience
with genAI illustrates this gap: “I know for a fact that it
wasn’t exactly as helpful as I thought it would be...because it
did not quite match my expectation”. Lastly, gauging genAI’s
limitations proved difficult for participants, particularly at the
onset of use. P14 commented on their initial skepticism,
“Initially, when I first started using it, I would trust it less
because I wasn’t quite exposed yet to how they work and how
effective they actually were”.
C2) Difficulty in effectively communicating needs or con-
text: Participants highlighted several challenges in effectively
conveying their needs and contexts to genAI. Framing the right
questions or prompts emerged as an obstacle for those seeking
useful responses. P6 highlighted, “My biggest challenge is
asking it the right questions, to get a useful response out of
it”. Participants reported that communicating context to genAI

Instructors validated these challenges without revealing any
new ones. They also noted that students still remain hesitant
to discuss challenges due to unclear academic AI policies.

V. ANTECEDENTS & IMPACTS OF CHALLENGES (RQ2)
In this section, we answer RQ2, detailing the causes and
consequences of the challenges encountered by SE students
using genAI tools. Figure 2 illustrates the associations between
genAI intrinsic issues (causes), challenges, and subsequent
impacts (consequences), which we detail next:
A. Causes
Interviewees identified several intrinsic issues with genAI
that contributed to their challenges, which we classified into

B. Consequences

Interviewees highlighted several consequences as a result of
facing challenges in using genAI within the SE context:
1) Impact on learning: Challenges in effectively communi-
cating needs or context (C2) resulted in participants learning

C1: Unclear understanding of

genAI and its use

Impact on learning

Response quality issues

C2: Difficulty in effectively
communicating needs/context

GenAI neglects students'

Impact on task

context & preferences

C3: Difficulty in aligning genAI

to process/preferences

Deceptive Behavior

Impact on self

C4: Issues in obtaining proper
rationales behind genAI responses

Scaffolding gaps

Impact on adoption

C5: Difficulty in appropriately

using genAI responses

Gaps in programming

support

Fig. 2.
Associations between genAI’s intrinsic issues (faults and gaps), challenges (C1-C5), and the resulting impacts. Issues in genAI
contributed to various challenges encountered by participants, which subsequently had impacts on learning, task, self, and genAI adoption.

and back ... I ended up doing it again from scratch using
a different resource” (P12). Difficulty in aligning genAI to
processes or preferences (C3) not only slowed them down but
also led to abandonment of tasks in certain situations (I2).
P16 shared, “ChatGPT didn’t really give me a good answer.
It went on for a long period of time, suggesting things that
were similar but not useful to my project. I gave up and
had to downsize that project”, illustrating how genAI derailed
their project goals and affected their timeline. Effectively
communicating needs (C2) affected participants who spent
substantial time refining prompts for actionable advice. P8
said that they “spent at least 30 minutes fixing prompts and
going back and forth to make it work”. Lastly, an unclear
understanding of genAI’s limitations (C1) often led students,
particularly the beginners (L1), to give up on their task, when
they found obstacles, due to lack of clear expectations about
genAI’s applicability. P12 clearly walked us through that: “For
someone new, AI won’t work, it would cause roadblocks and
they would give up lacking an assumption of what it can be
used for and what not.” Extraneous load from ineffective AI
responses (e.g., P12’s need to redo tasks from scratch due to
unsatisfactory explanations) and continuous prompt refinement
(e.g., P8’s time spent refining prompts) distract students from
focusing on the task at hand. Further, task abandonment by
P12 and P16 may be attributed to the combined intrinsic load
(inherent difficulty of the task) and extraneous load (setting
proper expectations about genAI’s applicability and managing
its responses), both of which impeded task completion.

wrong information. P1 reflected on this, stating, “Sometimes,
genAI gives wrong information due to mistakes in how I’ve
inquired as I didn’t know enough about the problem to ask the
question properly. I had to unlearn what AI said and relearn it
using YouTube”. Still, participants reported that difficulties in
aligning genAI with learning preferences (C3) and obtaining
proper rationales (C4) led to an incomplete understanding of
concepts, hindering in-depth comprehension: “I am not able
to use AI to wrestle with the ideas in the way I like to learn
and understand the reasoning behind things. Using genAI is
just like being told what to do, I don’t like that” (P1). The
participants also reported that lack of clear explanations from
genAI impedes grasping the underlying principles of concepts,
as on P6 words: “It didn’t really seem to help me understand
the critical components of why something might work and a lot
of things went over my head”. Moreover, participants indicated
difficulties in verifying AI responses (C5), particularly as
beginners (L1), leading to uncertainty about the correctness
of the learned material. P8’s experience underlined this: “I
ended up learning the wrong things often in the past...so when
it gives me responses that are not there on other platforms, I
am skeptical about whether I learned the right thing.”

These impacts on learning can be viewed through the lens
of Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) [69]. Essentially, difficulties
in communicating needs (C2), aligning AI with preferences
(C3), issues in obtaining clear rationales (C4), and verifying
AI responses (C5) all add to extraneous cognitive load, where
students must expend additional effort to use genAI and
interpret its responses, detracting from their learning process.
Moreover, challenges in obtaining proper rationales (C4) make
it harder to grasp underlying principles (or reasoning), thus
hindering in-depth comprehension.

3) Impact on self: Participants shared how they were
personally impacted by using genAI, highlighting instances
of over-reliance, self-doubt, and frustration. Over-reliance is
common among beginners (L1) [12] due to a lack of under-
standing of genAI’s limitations or its use (C1), leading to over-
dependence and initial blind trust in genAI. This was pointed
out by P7, who mentioned that “Initially, I would just prompt
it and trust whatever came back...I still find it confusing to
realize whether GPT can actually provide a solution or just is

2) Impact on task: Challenges in obtaining proper ratio-
nales (C4) and effectively using AI responses (C5) forced
participants to figure things out on their own, leading to time-
consuming setbacks: “GPT struggled to give an answer that
worked or explain why it didn’t work, it kept going back

We identified different ways SE students make use of genAI,
alongside where they perceive benefits and hurdles when using
it to complement SE education. It is important to carefully
consider how to incorporate genAI into the curriculum and its
impact on students; as an instructor reflected:
“Maybe I thought of my students to be confident in figuring
out the AI tools, I didn’t predict they would internalize these
struggles and get frustrated...It’s more serious than I predicted
and can be a very stressful experience for them.”
Backed by our results, we present a set of recommendations
for integrating genAI in the SE education context.
Considerations before adopting genAI in SE education.
Educators aiming to incorporate genAI into their SE curricula
should be aware of the issues that students might encounter
when using these tools for initial learning (L1) and advanced
implementations (I2), as depicted in Figure 1 and detailed in
Section IV-C. A significant obstacle in adopting this rapidly
developing technology is understanding and creating aware-
ness of its limitations and applicability (C1). This can be
particularly problematic for novice learners, who might rely
too heavily on genAI, viewing its outputs as final or unques-
tionable truths [12]. Educators must, thus, educate themselves
and the students about the workings and faults of genAI,
specifically that these tools are language models and not
knowledge models (i.e., they generate a sequence of symbols
and not necessarily factual information). Several universities
have put forth resources to help instructors understand how
to manage/identify genAI usage in the classroom [73, 74],
but these largely explain how to interact with the tool (C2)
and not how to incorporate its responses (C5). Educators must
emphasize the need to verify genAI’s outputs. This will help
especially those starting in the course by (1) setting clear
expectations regarding genAI’s assistance, and (2) scoping
their trust in AI [75, 76], instead of treating it like an expert.
Further, instead of penalizing students for using genAI,
which would only lead to more creative ways of academic
misconduct [9], what is needed is to educate them on ethical
and appropriate genAI usage and encourage them to acknowl-
edge the extent of AI’s role in their work. Students should also
recognize that they are ultimately responsible for the code they
generate—with (or without) genAI help. Thus, if security flaws
or faults exist in the code, they need to take ownership. This
ethos is particularly important to instill in senior SE students
as they work with external clients (capstone projects), open
source projects, or internships.
Equip students with the right skills. Educators must focus
on equipping SE students to be savvy-AI users, given the
software industry’s growing interest in integrating genAI into
its practices [77]. While AI will not (potentially) supplant
software engineers, individuals proficient in these technologies
will have more job opportunities and career advancement. This
leads to two guiding questions:
How to teach SE students to be savvy-AI users? Prior
research has frequently discussed the significance of prompt

The impact of these challenges on genAI adoption can
be understood through the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM) [72], primarily through two constructs: perceived ease
of use (PEOU) and perceived usefulness (PU). Both PEOU
and PU influence users’ intentions to use software tools.
In this context, challenges in using genAI responses (C5)
diminish PEOU, particularly for learners (L1), who struggle
with communicating needs (C2) and receiving proper ratio-
nales (C4). Moreover, ethical considerations (C1) negatively
influence both PU and PEOU, steering students away from
adopting genAI for advanced implementations (I2).

As with RQ1, we validated these findings with instructors,
who confirmed the patterns without proposing any changes.
The codebook is available in the supplemental material [56].

VIII. CONCLUSION

Our study explored the current state of genAI usage among
SE students to understand how they complement their SE
learning and implementation tasks. Through 16 reflective
interviews, we uncovered the contexts where these tools are
helpful and where they pose challenges, examining why these
challenges arise and how they impact students. Participants
reported that they perceived benefits when using genAI for
incremental learning (L2) or initial implementation tasks (I1).
Conversely, challenges arose in using these tools as beginners
(L1) or in advanced implementations (I2). Several challenges
occurred due to intrinsic issues in genAI itself, leading to im-
pacts on learning, tasks, self-perception, and genAI adoption.
A key call to action is on how to instill critical thinking,
problem-solving abilities, and AI literacy among SE students
both within traditional academic pathways and those aspiring
to enter the field of SE. Without clear guidelines on how
to effectively use genAI, we may have a scenario akin to
“learning to play the piano—once you hit the wrong key, it
becomes hard to stop, as what you’ve learned in that moment
is what you learn best.” (SE-Intermediate Instructor)
Data Availability: The research artifacts for this study are
publicly available on the companion website [56].
Acknowledgements: We thank all the study participants. This
work was partially supported by the National Science Foun-
dation under Grant Numbers 2235601, 2236198, 2247929,
2303042, and 2303043.

VII. THREATS TO VALIDITY

One important threat in interview studies is obtaining accu-
rate constructs through questions and avoid asking ambiguous
ones. To minimize this threat, we thoroughly evaluated our
script internally and assessed its validity through sandboxing
and pilot sessions until a team consensus was reached.
Another threat could arise from the absence of concrete
tasks conducted by the students during the study, limiting
our results to our participants’ recollections. We reduced
this by focusing discussions on concrete artifacts to elicit
participant experiences. Despite these measures, we recognize
the potential for measurement inaccuracies.
It is difficult to replicate qualitative research since human
behaviors, feelings, and perceptions change over time. Thus,
in the reliability thread,
Merriam and Tisdell [79] suggest
checking the consistency of the inferences. To increase con-
sistency, the analysis was conducted by two authors, followed

[1] OpenAI, “Gpt-4,” 2024.
[2] Google, “Gemini,” 2024.
[3] Microsoft, “Copilot,” 2024.
[4] A. Fan, B. Gokkaya, M. Harman, M. Lyubarskiy, S. Sengupta, S. Yoo,
and J. M. Zhang, “Large language models for software engineering: Sur-
vey and open problems,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engineering (ICSE-FoSE).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 31–53.
[5] C. Ebert and P. Louridas, “Generative AI for software practitioners,”
IEEE Software, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 30–38, 2023.
[6] D. Russo, “Navigating the complexity of generative AI adoption in
software engineering,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology, 2024.
[7] C. Bull and A. Kharrufa, “Generative AI assistants in software develop-
ment education: A vision for integrating generative AI into educational
practice, not instinctively defending against it.” IEEE Software, 2023.
[8] A. Nguyen-Duc, B. Cabrero-Daniel, A. Przybylek, C. Arora, D. Khanna,
T. Herda, U. Rafiq, J. Melegati, E. Guerra, K.-K. Kemell et al.,
“Generative artificial intelligence for software engineering–a research
agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18648, 2023.
[9] P. Denny, J. Prather, B. A. Becker, J. Finnie-Ansley, A. Hellas,
J. Leinonen, A. Luxton-Reilly, B. N. Reeves, E. A. Santos, and S. Sarsa,
“Computing education in the era of generative AI,” Communications of
the ACM, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 56–67, 2024.
[10] M. Welsh, “The end of programming,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 34–35, 2022.
[11] D. M. Yellin, “The premature obituary of programming,” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 41–44, 2023.
[12] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan,
H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman et al., “Evaluating large
language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374,
2021.
[13] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von
Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill et al.,
“On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[14] M. Amoozadeh, D. Daniels, S. Chen, D. Nam, A. Kumar, M. Hilton,
M. A. Alipour, and S. S. Ragavan, “Towards characterizing trust in gen-
erative artificial intelligence among students,” in 2023 ACM Conference
on International Computing Education Research-Volume 2, 2023, pp.
3–4.
[15] B. A. Becker, P. Denny, J. Finnie-Ansley, A. Luxton-Reilly, J. Prather,
and E. A. Santos, “Programming is hard-or at least it used to be:
Educational opportunities and challenges of AI code generation,” in
Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education V. 1, 2023, pp. 500–506.
[16] J. Penney, J. F. Pimentel, I. Steinmacher, and M. A. Gerosa, “An-
ticipating user needs: Insights from design fiction on conversational
agents for computational thinking,” in Chatbot Research and Design,
A. Følstad, T. Araujo, S. Papadopoulos, E. L.-C. Law, E. Luger,
M. Goodwin, S. Hobert, and P. B. Brandtzaeg, Eds.
Cham: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2024, pp. 204–219.
[17] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[18] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat et al., “Gpt-4
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[19] R. Choudhuri, D. Liu, I. Steinmacher, M. Gerosa, and A. Sarma,
“How Far Are We? The Triumphs and Trials of Generative AI in
Learning Software Engineering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
[20] A. J. Ko, “More than calculators: Why large language models threaten
public education,” Jan 2024.
[21] S. Lau and P. Guo, “From” ban it till we understand it” to” resistance
is futile”: How university programming instructors plan to adapt as
more students use AI code generation and explanation tools such as
chatgpt and github copilot,” in 2023 ACM Conference on International
Computing Education Research-Volume 1, 2023, pp. 106–121.
[22] J. T. Liang, C. Yang, and B. A. Myers, “A large-scale survey on
the usability of AI programming assistants: Successes and challenges,”
in Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.