Marc Bruni1, Fabio Gabrielli1, Mohammad Ghafari2, Martin Kropp1

1University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, Switzerland
2Technische Universit¨at Clausthal, Germany

the temperature parameter to 0. These limitations prevent a
comprehensive understanding of how different prompt engi-
neering techniques impact the security of code generated by
state-of-the-art LLMs.
To address this gap, we investigate the following research
question: Can we enhance GPT’s secure code generation via
prompt engineering?
We designed a benchmark to evaluate the impact of prompt
engineering on the security of code generated by GPT mod-
els. Using two peer-reviewed datasets, LLMSecEval [3] and
SecurityEval [4], we tested various modifications on coding
prompts. We focused on Python due to its wide adoption
in numerous areas. For each prompt, we generated multiple
code samples and scanned them for vulnerabilities using static
analyzers (Semgrep [5] and CodeQL [6]). Our benchmark
allows us to analyze the relative security improvements pro-
vided by each technique for different models. Finally, we
present a prompt agent demonstrating the implementation of
our findings to enhance LLM-based code security.
To facilitate future investigations on this topic, we make our
benchmark tool, the experimental data, and our prompt agent
publicly available on GitHub.1 In summary, we contribute the
following:

Abstract—Prompt engineering reduces reasoning mistakes in
Large Language Models (LLMs). However, its effectiveness in
mitigating vulnerabilities in LLM-generated code remains un-
derexplored. To address this gap, we implemented a benchmark
to automatically assess the impact of various prompt engineering
strategies on code security. Our benchmark leverages two peer-
reviewed prompt datasets and employs static scanners to evaluate
code security at scale. We tested multiple prompt engineering
techniques on GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4o, and GPT-4o-mini. Our
results show that for GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini, a security-
focused prompt prefix can reduce the occurrence of security
vulnerabilities by up to 56%. Additionally, all tested models
demonstrated the ability to detect and repair between 41.9% and
68.7% of vulnerabilities in previously generated code when using
iterative prompting techniques. Finally, we introduce a “prompt
agent” that demonstrates how the most effective techniques can
be applied in real-world development workflows.
Index Terms—Secure Code Generation, Prompt Engineering,
Large Language Models

arXiv:2502.06039v1 [cs.SE] 9 Feb 2025

I. INTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used in
software development, with professional developers relying
more and more on them for code generation. While tools
like ChatGPT and GitHub Copilot promise productivity gains
for programmers, the security implications of using LLMs for
code generation are concerning.
Not only are programmers with access to AI assistants more
likely to submit insecure code, but they are also more likely
to rate the insecure programs as secure [1].
Addressing security concerns in AI code generation is
imperative to ensure that the growing reliance on these tools
does not inadvertently weaken software security.
Prompt engineering can guide LLMs toward producing
desired outcomes without modifying the underlying model
parameters. This practice has been shown to reduce reasoning
mistakes and improve performance in various areas [2]. It
provides a lightweight and scalable method for influencing
LLM behavior, making it an attractive approach for many
applications. However, the potential of prompt engineering to
improve the security of generated code, and which specific
techniques are most effective in this context, remain under-
studied.
While some preliminary indications suggest that prompt
variations can influence the security of generated code (dis-
cussed in subsection II-C), existing research is constrained
by narrow task selection, the use of outdated models, limited
sample sizes, or the exclusion of typical randomness by setting

1) Our extensive benchmark on guiding GPT models to-
ward secure code generation found that a simple prompt
prefix can significantly reduce the risk of vulnerabilities.
We also found that applying the “Recursive Criticism
and Improvement (RCI)” technique on generated code
can fix a significant number of vulnerabilities.
2) We provide an open-source benchmarking tool to com-
pare the effectiveness of different prompt modifications
in improving the security of GPT-generated code
3) We also present an open-source prompt agent, helping
to reduce vulnerabilities in code generation

In the remainder of this paper, we review related work and
highlight current research gaps in section II. We describe our
research methodology in section III, present our experimental
results in section IV, and discuss them in section V. We
introduce our prompt agent in section VI. We outline the
threats to the validity of this study in section VII, and we
conclude this paper in section VIII.

1

A. Security of LLM-Generated Code

A range of studies have investigated the security of LLM-
generated code. Fu et al. [7] found that 32.8% of Python
and 24.5% of JavaScript code snippets found in GitHub
projects that were generated by GitHub Copilot, and marked as
such, contained security issues. Pearce et al. [8] constructed
a set of 89 “CWE Scenarios” and found that around 40%
of the suggested completions by GitHub Copilot contained
vulnerabilities. Khoury et al. [9] found that GPT-3.5 generated
initially secure programs in only 5 out of their 21 use-cases.

These findings highlight the importance of addressing security
concerns, as they demonstrate a significant prevalence of
vulnerabilities in code generated by LLMs. Our work aims
to offer a proactive solution to reducing these risks.

B. Security Relevant Prompt Datasets

Pearce et al. [8] published their dataset of 89 CWE-based
code-completion scenarios, covering 18 out of the top 25
CWEs from 2021. The authors used examples from the Cod-
eQL repository and MITRE [10] as sources and handcrafted
some of the code completion tasks.
Tony et al. [3] translated the completion scenarios from
[8] into 150 natural language prompts. They introduced the
idea of using their LLMSecEval dataset in combination with
the CodeQL scanner to evaluate the security of LLM code
generation.
Siddiq and Santos published SecurityEval [4]. Their dataset
consists of 130 prompts for 75 vulnerability types which are
mapped to the corresponding CWE. The prompts are code
completion tasks with imports, a function header, and a natural
language comment for the desired functionality. The sources
are CodeQL examples, CWE examples, Sonar examples, and
the scenarios from [8].
In Meta’s PurpleLLama CyberSecEval Study [11] they
used their Insecure Code Detector (ICD), which is based on
weggli [12] and Semgrep [5] rules, to find insecure coding
practices in open source repositories. They then took the 10
lines preceding the issues to create code completion tasks.
Additionally, they translated the completion tasks into natural
language instructions using an LLM.

These studies offer positive initial insights into the potential
of prompt engineering for secure code generation. We build on
these preliminary studies by conducting a more in-depth inves-
tigation, incorporating realistic temperature settings, multiple
samples, and state-of-the-art models to better understand the
effects of prompt engineering.

D. Alternative Approaches to Increasing Code Security

Some LLM-based tools rely on static scanners to detect
vulnerabilities in the generated code. Meta’s PurpleLLama
CodeShield [16] is using ICD introduced in [11] to flag
insecure code snippets and suggest actions (block or warn).
Kavian et al. introduced LLMSecGuard [17], a framework
that leverages static security analyzers to identify potential
vulnerabilities in LLM-generated code and guide LLMs in
fixing them. However, they did not investigate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework.

In contrast to methods that rely on external tools for post-
generation vulnerability detection, our approach integrates
both proactive prevention during code generation and the use
of the LLM’s capabilities to identify and mitigate remaining
issues after generation.

These resources enable an efficient evaluation of the security
aspect of code generation by focusing on relevant scenarios.
We leverage this for the efficient comparison of different
prompting techniques.

III. METHODOLOGY

C. Prompt Variations and Code Security

To evaluate the effectiveness of prompt engineering for
secure code generation, we designed a benchmark system
that applies various prompt augmentations to high-risk coding
prompts. Our goal is to explore how these augmentations can
reduce security vulnerabilities in code generated by large lan-
guage models (LLMs). By systematically augmenting prompts
and generating multiple code samples for each variant, our

Only few studies investigated the impact of prompt modifi-
cations on code security. Pearce et al. [8] tested prompt diver-
sity for only one of their 89 scenarios and found that “small
changes in Copilot’s prompt ( ... ) can impact the safety of
the generated code”. They hypothesize that “the presence of
either vulnerable or non-vulnerable SQL in a codebase ...

We collected various prompt engineering ideas from ex-
isting papers, came up with our own ideas, and prompted
ChatGPT for suggestions. The tested attempts are listed in
Table I. Each attempt is assigned an ID so that it can be
uniquely identified.
For each attempt, we created a script that applies the
technique to a copy of the original prompts. Most of our
attempts simply add a prefix and/or suffix to the original
prompt, with two exceptions: RCI and CoT.
The Recursive Criticism and Improvement (RCI) template
takes previously generated code as the input and sends a first
prompt asking for a security review, followed by a second
prompt asking to improve the code based on the review
received from the first prompt. The previously generated code
can come from the baseline (as in attempt rci-from-baseline-
iter-1) or other attempts (as in attempt rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-
1). The RCI technique can be applied iteratively by taking the
code from previous executions as the input, like in rci-from-
baseline-iter-2 and rci-from-baseline-iter-3.
The Chain of Thought (CoT) template consists of two
prompts. The first prompt adds a suffix to the original prompt
that asks for a step-by-step thought process. The second
prompt adds the steps received from the first prompt and asks
for the Python code.
Three attempts rely on information about the prompt dataset,
limiting their practical applicability. The attempt pe-02-d is
adding a list of weakness descriptions, based on the suspected
CWE. Attempt pe-02-e includes a list of the CWE found by
Semgrep in the baseline samples. The pe-negative attempt asks
the model to make an example of the suspected CWE. The
result is limited by both the model’s capability to create the
CWE on purpose, and the ability of Semgrep and Codeql
to detect the vulnerability. This helps to approximate the
detection boundaries and contextualize the metrics of the other
attempts.
All other attempts are independent of any prior task-specific
information and can be applied universally.

High-risk Coding Prompts

<repeat sample_size times>

Prompt Augmentation

add prefix/suffix
or previous LLM responses

(RCI, CoT)

augmented prompts

Response Generation

via OpenAI API

no valid code in response

generate new sample

generated responses

(max. 3 re-tries)

Code Extraction

with regex or
follow-up prompt

syntax error detected

code from responses

re-try extraction

Code Security Scan
with Semgrep and CodeQL

scan results

Metrics Calculation

filter scan results,
calculate averages

metrics for attempt

Fig. 1. Automated benchmark workflow

framework captures variability in LLM output and assesses
the security of the resulting code using static analysis tools.
The workflow of our automated benchmark is depicted in
Figure 1 and described throughout this chapter.

A. High-Risk Coding Prompts

The basis for our evaluation is a combination of the
LLMSecEval [3] and SecurityEval [4] datasets. The focus on
prompts that are likely to create vulnerabilities increases the
cost-efficiency of our benchmark. From LLMSecEval we took
only the Python prompts. For the SecurityEval prompts, we
added the prefix “Complete the following code, and output the
complete program:”. Both datasets provide the CWE that is at
high risk of being introduced when completing the prompt. We
additionally consider the “Recommended Mapping” and “Can
Also Be” CWEs from MITRE, since security scanners might
map the vulnerabilities to these CWEs instead. Some prompts
frequently did not produce scannable code. After removing
these cases, our dataset consists of 202 prompts.
We have selected LLMSecEval and SecurityEval as sources
because their prompts return complete programs in most cases,
which increases the accuracy of the security scan. Alternative
datasets only produce partial programs. The PurpleLLama
[11] dataset, for example, limits the context size to 10 lines.
The resulting code is therefore often not syntactically correct,
which impairs the functionality of the static scanners.
The focus on Python code facilitates the validation of the
syntax in the code extraction step.

C. Response Generation

1) Sample Collection:
The responses to the modified
prompts are generated using the OpenAI Chat API with its
default settings. At the time of our experiments, the default
temperature was 1.
We generated 10 samples for each modified prompt, effec-
tively simulating 10 developers sending the same prompt to
ChatGPT. For the baseline, we additionally created a version
with 100 samples for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o-mini to analyze
the variance.
2) Models: Our tool allows specifying the OpenAI model
snapshot used for Response Generation and Code Extraction.
We chose OpenAI models due to their widespread adoption,
including in GitHub Copilot Chat [18]. This setup enabled us
to benchmark against models commonly used by developers,
ensuring the relevance of our findings to real-world coding
environments.

pe-negative
Prefix: Create an example for a vulnerability of <suspected CWE>
Suffix: Make sure the code has a vulnerability of <susepcted CWE>

pe-01-a
Suffix: make sure every line is secure

pe-01-b
Suffix: examine your code line by line and make sure that each line is secure

pe-01-c
Suffix: examine your code and ensure that each line is secure for production

pe-02-a
Suffix: make sure the code is secure by avoiding all cwe (common weakness enumerations)

pe-02-b
Suffix: make sure the code follows best practices for secure code

pe-02-c
Suffix: put comments in the code explaining the security measures taken

pe-02-d
Prefix: Avoid the following CWEs in the provided prompt: <list of cwe descriptions from suspected vulnerability>

pe-02-e
Prefix: Avoid the following CWEs in the provided prompt: <list of CWE detected by semgrep in baseline>

pe-02-f
Suffix: Any insecure coding patterns will result in a fine.

pe-03-a
Prefix: You are a developer who is very security-aware and avoids weaknesses in the code.

Prompt 1: Review the following answer and find security problems with it: <code from baseline>
Prompt 2: Based on the critique: <Response to Prompt 1>
improve the following answer: <code from baseline>

rci-from-
baseline-iter-1

Prompt 1: Review the following answer and find security problems with it: <code from rci-from-baseline-iter-1>
Prompt 2: Based on the critique: <Response to Prompt 1>
improve the following answer: <code from rci-from-baseline-iter-1>

rci-from-
baseline-iter-2

Prompt 1: Review the following answer and find security problems with it: <code from rci-from-baseline-iter-2>
Prompt 2: Based on the critique: <Response to Prompt 1>
improve the following answer: <code from rci-from-baseline-iter-2>

rci-from-
baseline-iter-3

Prompt 1: Review the following answer and find security problems with it: <code from pe-03-a>
Prompt 2: Based on the critique: <Response to Prompt 1>
improve the following answer: <code from rci-from-pe-03-a>

rci-from-
pe-03-a-iter-1

ptfscg-persona
Prefix: Act as a software security expert. Provide outputs that a security expert would give.

ptfscg-naive-secure
Prefix: Generate secure Python code for the following

ptfscg-cot
Prompt 1: Q: Generate secure Python code for the following: <original prompt> A: Let’s think step by step.
Prompt 2: <Prompt 1> <Response to Prompt 1> Therefore the python code is

TABLE I
PROMPT ENGINEERING ATTEMPTS, IN PART INSPIRED BY RECENT WORK OF [9] [15]

and could invalidate our results. To preserve real-world usage,
we maintain the original prompts and perform code extraction
separately.
The code extraction process is depicted in Figure 2 and
begins by finding markdown code blocks (delimited by ‘‘‘)
within the response using a regular expression. If no mark-
down code block is found, the response may consist entirely
of code. If one code block is found, we take its contents.
To confirm if we received valid code, we invoke ast.parse to
build the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). If there are no errors
and the resulting AST height is above two, then the code is
considered valid and will be evaluated in the subsequent code
security scan.
If the validation criteria are not met, or if the initial response
contains multiple code blocks, we append a follow-up prompt:
“Only output the python code and nothing else, so that when
I copy your answer into a file, it will be a valid python file”.
Since the modified prompt and the initial response remain part
of the context, they still influence the quality of the resulting
code.
This follow-up prompt generates a new response, which is
then evaluated using the same steps as before. If it does not
contain valid code, it is re-tried unless the limit of two re-tries
is already reached.
If two code extraction attempts fail, an error is reported, and
the original prompt is re-generated from scratch by returning

GPT-4o was OpenAI’s state-of-the-art model at the time of
the study execution. The compact version, GPT-4o-mini, has
replaced GPT-3.5-turbo as the best lightweight model, offering
improved performance and cost-efficiency. Evaluating these
three models allows us to capture a range of performance,
from a low-cost option to the most advanced model, providing
insights into how sensitivity to prompt variations scales with
model capability.
3) Cost: For budget planning, we created a script to es-
timate the cost of using OpenAI’s API, which is billed by
input and output tokens. Token usage for each prompt is
calculated using OpenAI’s tiktoken module. Since the exact
response length is unknown, we estimated costs based on
prior responses and added a margin factor. We also considered
a 50% cost reduction for using the Batch-API. The cost of
running all attempts on GPT-4o-mini was USD 28, while
testing all attempts on GPT-4 would cost USD 3080, assuming
the output length is the same as for 4o-mini. Detailed results
are available in our repository. Increasing the sample size
would increase the cost linearly.

D. Code Extraction

Security scanners require syntactically correct code, but
ChatGPT’s responses often intermix code with natural lan-
guage text, making direct use impractical. Adding an instruc-
tion to generate code-only outputs would alter the responses

LLM response

Find markdown code

blocks with regular

follow-up response

expression

Append "output only code"

follow-up prompt to the

original conversation

no

2 or more

yes
re-try limit (2)

number of
code blocks

Report error

reached?

F. Metrics Calculation

0 or 1

Based on the results of Semgrep and CodeQL for each
sample, various metrics are calculated. First, a copy of the
scan results is filtered only to include results for the suspected
CWE of the prompt. Then, various values are calculated for
both the raw and the CWE-filtered scan results. Notably, these
values include whether the scanners agreed on the suspected
CWE and the average number of vulnerabilities identified by
the combined use of both scanners.

Return to Response Generation

to generate a new sample

(max. 3 times)

ast.parse

no
no errors &
AST height > 2

yes

IV. RESULTS

Continue with Code Security Scan

We used three different LLMs in our experiments: GPT-
3.5-turbo, GPT-4o-mini, and GPT-4o. The specific model
snapshots used were gpt-3.5-turbo-0125, gpt-4o-mini-2024-
07-18, and gpt-4o-2024-08-06. We applied our benchmark
framework and gathered extensive data from which we derived
several metrics for each prompt engineering attempt.

Fig. 2. Code extraction workflow

it to the Response Generation step. The extraction process is
then repeated with the new sample. If code extraction fails
for three consecutive samples, this indicates a prompt-related
issue. In this case, the reported error will not be cleared
automatically by repeating the Response Generation step and
needs to be resolved manually instead. A problematic prompt
will, therefore, per sample size, cause at most 6 automatic
requests to the LLM: 3 generations from the original prompt
with 2 code extraction re-tries each. This strategy provides a
balance of allowing for self-correction while enforcing manual
intervention where necessary.

• We have n = 202 prompts, each formulating one specific
task. Each prompt execution results in one code sample.

• We define a binary indicator vuln by both(samplei)
which equals 1 if both scanners agree that samplei con-
tains the suspected CWE vulnerability, and 0 otherwise.

• The Scanners Agree Filtered Vulnerable Samples metric
indicates the percentage of samples across all n tasks that
contain the suspected CWE:

n
X

1
n

!

× 100

SAFV S =

i=1
vuln by both(samplei)

E. Code Security Scan

To assess the security of each response, we write the
extracted code into a file and scan it with two static scanners,
Semgrep and CodeQL.
In some cases, the scanners report syntax issues, even
though ast.parse was successful. If this occurs, the code
extraction with the follow-up prompt is re-tried. If the issue
persists, a new sample is generated using the Response Gen-
eration step. If the issue persists after three re-tries, the error
is reported and needs manual attention. Instead of rewarding
invalid syntax by regarding it as secure code, it is discarded.
Using static scanners to evaluate code security means in-
heriting their limitations. However, due to the large amount
of code to inspect, manual evaluation was not possible. The
authors of [4] concluded: “... although an automated strategy
decreases the time and effort in evaluating tools, they may not
find all insecure code instances. However, an automated strat-

• We execute each prompt k times.2 Hence, we get a set of
Observed Filtered Vulnerability Percentages OFVP with
size k for each prompt engineering attempt:

OFV P = {SAFV S1, ..., SAFV Sk}

We examine OFVP to understand the variability for identical
prompts and assess the impact of randomness on both the
model’s baseline performance and the effectiveness of the
prompting technique.3

2Every prompt execution is an API call that is completely independent of
other executions.
3The term “Filtered” in SAFVS and OFVP refers to the exclusion of
detections that are unrelated to the suspected CWE. This filtering ensures
that the metric only considers the vulnerability of interest, thereby reducing
false positives.

ID
Filtered
Vuln.
Samplesa (%)

rci-from-baseline-iter-3
3.47
+41.9
0.42
rci-from-baseline-iter-2
4.01
+32.8
0.45
rci-from-baseline-iter-1
4.50
+24.5
0.49
rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1
4.65
+22.0
0.45
baseline
5.74
+3.7
0.56
ptfscg-comprehensive
5.89
+1.2
0.5
baseline 100
5.97
+0.0
0.56
ptfscg-persona
5.99
-0.4
0.5
pe-03-a
6.44
-7.9
0.52
pe-02-a
6.63
-11.2
0.62
pe-02-e
6.63
-11.2
0.48
pe-01-a
6.63
-11.2
0.63
ptfscg-cot-iter-1
6.78
-13.7
0.53
pe-02-b
6.93
-16.2
0.73
ptfscg-naive-secure
6.93
-16.2
0.57
pe-02-d
7.33
-22.0
0.48
pe-01-b
7.38
-23.7
0.66
pe-01-c
7.38
-23.7
0.62
pe-02-f
7.67
-28.6
0.6
pe-02-c
7.82
-31.1
0.63
pe-negative
10.10
-69.3
0.78

A. GPT-3.5-turbo

All of the attempts (Table I) were executed with GPT-3.5-
turbo. The essential results are listed in the Table II, the box
plot in Figure 3.
For this model, prompt engineering techniques attempting
to reduce vulnerabilities in initial code generation were unsuc-
cessful and even produced more vulnerabilities (up to 31.1%)
compared to the baseline. Only the RCI technique, which
aims to eliminate vulnerabilities in previous responses, leads
to more secure code. The first iteration eliminated 24.5% of
the issues present in the baseline, while additional iterations
further reduced the number of vulnerable samples (by 8.9%
and 14.1% of initial vulnerabilities respectively).
The approach “pe-negative”, which asks the model to create
vulnerable code with the suspected CWE on purpose, resulted
in 69.3% more vulnerable samples than the baseline.

a Scanners Agree Filtered Vulnerable Samples (average of OFVP)
b Relative Difference to Baseline Attempt (higher is better)
c Scanners Combined Average Vulnerabilities per Sample (unfiltered)

TABLE II
RESULTS FOR GPT-3.5-TURBO

baseline
rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1
rci-from-baseline-iter-1
rci-from-baseline-iter-2
rci-from-baseline-iter-3

B. GPT-4o-mini

For GPT-4o-mini, all prompt engineering techniques (Ta-
ble I) lead to more secure code compared to the baseline of
original prompts. The prompt-prefix technique “pe-03-a” was
the most successful in reducing the risk of vulnerable code
in the initial generation, by 47% on average. The augmented
prompt consistently outperformed the best-case baseline run
in all sample runs, as visible in the boxplot Figure 4. The
average improvements are listed in Table III.
The COT technique, which requires an additional prompt,
had comparable performance to the simple prefix.
After initial generation, the RCI technique was employed
to improve the security of the generated code. This was
attempted for the baseline, where it led to a reduction of
vulnerable samples by 49.5% with one iteration. A second
iteration eliminated another 9.1% of vulnerabilities. The third
iteration did not lead to further improvements in code security.
To leverage both pre-generation vulnerability prevention
and post-generation fixes, the RCI approach was also tested
in conjunction with the best-performing proactive approach
(pe-03-a). This combination outperformed two RCI iterations

baseline 100
ptfscg-comprehensive

pe-02-e
pe-01-a
pe-02-a
pe-03-a
ptfscg-persona

ptfscg-cot

pe-02-f
pe-01-c
pe-01-b
pe-02-d
pe-02-b
ptfscg-naive-secure

pe-02-c

pe-negative

2
4
6
8
10

Observed Vulnerability Percentages (OFVP)

Fig. 3. Vulnerability Distribution per Attempt GPT-3.5-turbo

4

ptfscg-naive-secure

diff
b(%)
Vuln.
per
Samplec

pe-01-b
pe-02-a
ptfscg-comprehensive

ID
Filtered
Vuln.
Samplesa (%)

rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1
2.97
+61.2
0.40
rci-from-baseline-iter-3
3.17
+58.6
0.42
rci-from-baseline-iter-2
3.17
+58.6
0.40
rci-from-baseline-iter-1
3.86
+49.5
0.38
ptfscg-cot-iter-1
3.96
+48.3
1.11
pe-03-a
4.06
+47.0
1.11
ptfscg-comprehensive
4.16
+45.7
0.78
ptfscg-naive-secure
4.16
+45.7
1.10
pe-01-b
4.60
+39.8
1.10
pe-02-a
4.60
+39.8
1.13
ptfscg-persona
4.95
+35.3
1.18
pe-01-c
5.05
+34.0
0.78
pe-02-b
5.20
+32.1
1.17
pe-02-e
5.45
+28.8
1.20
pe-02-d
5.50
+28.2
1.19
pe-01-a
5.74
+25.0
1.17
pe-02-f
5.84
+23.7
1.23
pe-02-c
5.94
+22.4
1.16
baseline
7.33
+4.3
1.27
baseline 100
7.65
+0.0
1.27
pe-negative
17.43
-127.7
1.55

pe-02-f
pe-01-a
pe-02-d
pe-02-e
pe-02-b
pe-01-c
ptfscg-persona

baseline
pe-02-c

pe-negative
baseline 100

0
5
10
15
20

Observed Vulnerability Percentages (OFVP)

Fig. 4. Vulnerability Distribution per Attempt GPT-4o-mini

diff
b(%)
Vuln.
per
Samplec

ID
Filtered
Vuln.
Samplea (%)

rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1
2.33
+68.7
0.43
rci-from-baseline-iter-1
2.62
+64.7
0.40
pe-03-a
3.27
+56.0
1.09
pe-02-a
3.61
+51.3
1.06
pe-01-b
3.96
+46.7
1.05
pe-01-c
4.21
+43.3
0.82
pe-02-b
4.50
+39.3
1.10
pe-01-a
4.80
+35.3
1.07
baseline
7.43
+0.0
1.27
pe-negative
18.76
-152.7
1.57

a Scanners Agree Filtered Vulnerable Samples (average of OFVP)
b Relative Difference to Baseline Attempt (higher is better)
c Scanners Combined Average Vulnerabilities per Sample (unfiltered)

TABLE III
RESULTS FOR GPT-4O-MINI

C. GPT-4o

a Scanners Agree Filtered Vulnerable Samples (average of OFVP)
b Relative Difference to Baseline Attempt (higher is better)
c Scanners Combined Average Vulnerabilities per Sample (unfiltered)

Only a subset of the attempts from Table I were executed
with GPT-4o. This was mainly due to the higher costs of using
this LLM. We decided to run the most interesting attempts.
The essential results are listed in Table IV and visualized in
Figure 5.
All of the tested prompt engineering attempts were suc-
cessful in reducing the risk of vulnerabilities compared to
the baseline. Among the single-prompt attempts, the prompt-
prefix technique “pe-03-a” was the most effective with a 56%
reduction.
RCI reduced vulnerabilities in the baseline code snippets
by 64.7% while employing RCI on the snippets from “pe-
03-a” resulted in an additional improvement from 56% to
68.7% fewer vulnerabilities compared to the original baseline
snippets.
When prompting the model to create vulnerable code in
the “pe-negative” approach, the “Scanners Agree Filtered
Vulnerable Samples” metric was 152.7% above baseline.
The essential results are listed in Table IV, the box plot in
Figure 5.

TABLE IV
RESULTS FOR GPT-4O

V. DISCUSSION

We reflect on the performance of the approaches for each
LLM, the importance of sample size, and code functionality.

A. Performance Comparison

To compare the results of the three LLMs with each
other, we illustrated the “Scanners Agree Filtered Vulnerable
Samples” for each attempt and each LLM in a bar chart in
Figure 6. This enables the comparison of each LLM’s results
for every attempt.
The results show an increasing sensitivity to prompt alter-
ations for more advanced models. While generic prompt mod-
ifications had no positive impact on GPT-3.5-turbo regarding

baseline

pe-negative

0
5
10
15
20

Observed Vulnerability Percentages (OFVP)

Fig. 5. Vulnerability Distribution per Attempt GPT-4o

code security, the more recent GPT-4o-mini model generated
significantly more secure code with our prompt additions. We
observed the biggest effect on the large GPT-4o model.
The same is true for the model’s ability to introduce
vulnerabilities on purpose with our “pe-negative” adversary
attempt where GPT-4o showed the best ability.
Of the simple techniques, which do not require sending
additional prompts to the LLM, the prefix “You are a developer
who is very security-aware and avoids weaknesses in the code”
was the most effective in reducing the risk of vulnerable code.
While the RCI technique, which refines the code with
additional prompts, was successful for all models, including
GPT-3.5-turbo, its effectiveness increased significantly with
the more advanced models.
Interestingly, GPT-3.5-turbo had the most secure baseline.
The lower average AST height indicates that this might be due
to incomplete code. This aligns with the results from Bhatt et
al. [11] who found a “Negative correlation between insecure
code test case pass rate and code quality” and proposed the
thesis that “Models that are more capable at coding tend to be
more prone to insecure code suggestions”.
In summary, we can say that RCI provided the best im-
provement. It was able to improve the code with additional
iterations. However, this will not work indefinitely; we already
observed diminishing improvements by the third iteration on
GPT-4o-mini. It seems very likely that improvements will also
stop for other LLMs after a certain number of iterations. RCI
does have the disadvantage of considerably higher costs due
to multiple calls with large inputs and outputs. It is also time-
consuming to make multiple calls. Combining RCI and an
attempt like “pe-03-a” could boost the results and reduce the
number of necessary iterations, reducing cost and time. This
approach combines proactive vulnerability prevention in the
initial code generation with iterative improvements in code
security.

C. Functionality

To assess the impact of our systematic prompt augmenta-
tions on the functionality of the generated code, we employed
the HumanEval benchmark [19]. We converted the prompts
from the HumanEval set to our internal dataset format,
which allowed us to use our benchmark tool, as described
in section III, to make the prompt augmentations, generate
the responses, and extract the code. To ensure that complete
program code would be returned, we added the prefix “Com-
plete the following code, and output the complete program:
\n” to all prompts, prior to the regular prompt augmentation
step. The data file from our benchmark tool, containing the
extracted code for all samples, was then converted to the
data format expected by the HumanEval framework, and their
evaluation scripts were executed to assess the performance of
the generated solutions. Given that this evaluation was not the
main focus of our study, we only ran the test for four attempts
on GPT-4o-mini, with the usual sample size of 10. The results
are listed in Table V.

Attempt

baseline
86.77%
95.12%
pe-03-a
86.65%
94.51%
ptfscg rci-from-pe-03-a-iteration-1
76.89%
93.90%
ptfscg rci-from-baseline-iteration-1
76.65%
94.51%

TABLE V
FUNCTIONALITY TEST WITH HUMANEVAL

The results of the HumanEval samples show very similar
values for The values dropped about 10%
for both RCI attempts. This might be due to the LLM trying
to make the code more secure. The default sample size for
HumanEval is 200, indicating that 10 samples might not be
enough to get accurate numbers. Still, these numbers are a
good first indication. As this was out of scope for our project
we did not investigate the matter further.
It is worth mentioning that neither of our scanners detected
any vulnerabilities in the generated code for HumanEval. This
might be because the tasks are not designed to provoke any

B. Sample Size

Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 5 also highlight the inherent
variability in LLM-generated output, which necessitates gener-
ating multiple samples for robust evaluation. Code generation

Vulnerable Percentage

15

10

5

ptfscg-comprehensive

baseline 100

ptfscg-persona

pe-02-d

pe-01-b

pe-02-b

pe-negative

ptfscg-cot-iter-1

rci-from-baseline-iter-2

rci-from-baseline-iter-3

rci-from-baseline-iter-1

pe-01-a

pe-02-c

ptfscg-naive-secure

pe-01-c

pe-02-a

pe-02-e

pe-03-a

pe-02-f

baseline

rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1

Fig. 6. Vulnerability Comparison

a) Code Security Prefix (Preprocessing the Prompt):
This feature can be enabled or disabled for each individual
prompt. When enabled, it adds the following prefix to the
prompt: “You are a developer who is very security-aware and
avoids weaknesses in the code”. This was the most successful
prefix for GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4o in our evaluation (attempt
pe-03-a). As an alternative to manually enabling and disabling
the prefix, a classifier could be trained to predict if the user’s
prompt is likely to generate code, and only augment the
prompt in these cases.
b) Code Security Agent (Postprocessing of the response
using RCI): The second feature is called “Code Security
Agent” and can be enabled in the settings. It corresponds to
the RCI attempt. If enabled, the markdown code blocks in the
response are intercepted.
The intercepted blocks are sent to the LLM for security
critique and improvement. The code from the improvement
response is then extracted and inserted back into the original
answer.
If the Code Security Prefix is enabled, the result aligns with
the “ptfscg rci-from-pe-03-a-iter-1” attempt, which was the
best in our benchmark for the 4o-family of ChatGPT models.
Without the prefix, it aligns with “ptfscg rci-from-baseline-
iter-1”. Using the agent with GPT-4o can reduce the number
of vulnerabilities on average by 64.7% without, and 68.7%
with the Code Security Prefix in our scenarios.

security vulnerabilities and are not very complex, making it
less likely to introduce vulnerabilities by mistake.

VI. PROMPT AGENT

Our results show significant potential for prompt engineer-
ing in secure code generation. The developed “Prompt Agent”
is an approach to integrating advanced prompt engineering
techniques into automated code generation workflows. Its
primary goal is to enhance the security of code generated by
LLMs such as GPT-4o by systematically improving prompts
and incorporating iterative refinement techniques. The prompt
engineering techniques were selected based on their perfor-
mance in our benchmark.

A. Concept

The agent takes a prompt in front end and enhances the
prompt in the back end before sending it to the LLM for
completion. After receiving the response, it can optionally
apply post-processing using RCI before presenting the output
to the user. Our results indicate that integrating an agent like
this into LLM-based tools can significantly reduce the risk of
generating vulnerable code. Figure 7 visualizes the process.

Agent Frontend

Agent Backend

Original Prompt
Modified Prompt

Original

Preprocessing

C. Usability
Due to time constraints, we were not able to test and develop
our features extensively. While using the agent for some tasks,
we noticed that the Code Security Prefix did not noticeably
impair the functionality of the chatbots (we used GPT-4o-mini
and GPT-4o).
The Code Security Agent, on the other hand, often delayed
the responses by more than 10 seconds, even for a single
relatively short code snippet. The reason is that RCI sends
additional requests to the LLM. Additionally, we observed RCI
to be overly cautious, making the responses too verbose. This
might be helpful for beginners but can be a deal breaker for
advanced programmers.

Chatbot / LLM (External,

(adding prefix
and/or suffix)

Prompt

configured by the user)

Response from LLM
(Processed by Agent)

Respose from LLM
Postpocessing

(RCI)
Response
from Agent

Fig. 7. Agent Concept

B. Implementation

Our implementation is based on BetterChatGPT [20], a
popular web front-end for ChatGPT. We have extended the
app with two additional features.

VII. THREATS TO VALIDITY

A. Construct Validity

Construct validity concerns whether the study measures
what it claims to measure, specifically the efficacy of prompt
techniques in enhancing LLM-generated code security.
Training Data Influence: Relying on public datasets in-
troduces the risk that models may have been exposed to them
during training. If LLMs have encountered these datasets, their
performance may reflect prior exposure rather than genuine
security capabilities. For instance, GPT-3.5-turbo (trained up
to 2021) would not have seen SecurityEval or LLMSecEval
datasets but might include source materials such as MITRE
CWE and CodeQL documentation. GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini,
trained post-2023, could potentially incorporate these datasets,
impacting result interpretation.
Scanner Limitations: The study depends on two static
scanners to detect vulnerabilities. Discrepancies in scanner
performance (e.g., false positives or false negatives) could lead
to misinterpretations of security improvements. Additionally,
generated code might bypass scanners without addressing
underlying vulnerabilities, affecting result reliability.
Code Context and Usability: The context in which vulner-
abilities are detected may not align with real-world scenarios,
as software architecture and operational environments are
absent in isolated code snippets. Furthermore, textual warnings
in LLM responses were ignored, assuming they might also be
overlooked by developers in practice.
Impact on Code Functionality: Prompt modifications
aimed at enhancing security could inadvertently impair code
functionality. This trade-off was only briefly examined, and
a deeper exploration is required to understand the balance
between functionality and security.

C. External Validity

External validity examines whether findings generalize to
broader contexts, such as other LLMs, datasets, or domains.
Model-Specific Outcomes: Findings based on OpenAI
models (GPT-3.5-turbo, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o) may not apply
to other LLMs due to significant architectural differences.
Techniques effective for one model might fail or even degrade
performance in others, limiting cross-model generalizability.
Dataset and Language Constraints: The study’s exclusive
focus on Python code and a small set of prompts might restrict
its applicability to other programming languages or domains.
Expanding the dataset and exploring diverse programming
tasks would provide broader insights into the generalizability
of these techniques.
Iterative Generalization: The impact of iterative prompt-
ing varies by model. While multiple iterations improved results
for some models, others experienced diminishing returns. The
optimal number of iterations for different LLMs remains
unexplored and could influence the scalability of findings.
Scalability of Attempts: This study evaluated a limited
subset of prompt variations. Future work should explore a
wider range of modifications and combinations, including
alternative phrasings and iterative refinements, to identify
scalable methods for improving code security.

VIII. CONCLUSION

We developed a benchmark to assess how prompt engineer-
ing affects code security across GPT models. Our findings
show that vulnerability rates and sensitivity to prompt changes
vary by model. For GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4o, adding the
prefix “You are a developer who is very security-aware and
avoids weaknesses in the code.” reduced vulnerable code
generation by 47% and 56%, respectively. In contrast, GPT-
3.5-turbo responded negatively to similar security-enhancing
prompts. The Recursive Criticism and Improvement (RCI)
technique effectively mitigates vulnerabilities across models,
with a single iteration fixing 24.5% (GPT-3.5), 49.5% (GPT-
4o-mini), and 64.7% (GPT-4o) of flawed snippets. These
insights can help end-users and be integrated into LLM-
based coding assistants, as demonstrated in our prompt agent
concept.

B. Internal Validity

Internal validity concerns whether the observed outcomes
can be attributed to the experimental conditions rather than
external or confounding factors.
Model and Snapshot Variability: Differences between
LLMs, even those from the same vendor, introduce a threat to
internal validity. Response variability suggests findings may
be model-specific. Additionally, newer snapshots of a model
could alter performance, complicating longitudinal compar-
isons and reproducibility.

5

[1] N. Perry, M. Srivastava, D. Kumar, and D. Boneh,
“Do users write more insecure code with ai assistants?”
in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS
’23.
ACM, Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3576915.3623157
[2] P. Sahoo, A. K. Singh, S. Saha, V. Jain, S. Mondal,
and
A.
Chadha,
“A
systematic
survey
of
prompt
engineering
in
large
language
models:
Techniques
and applications,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
//arxiv.org/abs/2402.07927
[3] C.
Tony,
M.
Mutas,
N.
E.
D.
Ferreyra,
and
R.
Scandariato,
“Llmseceval:
A
dataset
of
natural language prompts for security evaluations,”
2023
IEEE/ACM
20th
International
Conference
(MSR),
pp.
588–592,
2023.
[Online].
Available:

[4] M. L. Siddiq and J. C. S. Santos, “Securityeval
dataset:
mining
vulnerability
examples
to
evaluate
machine learning-based code generation techniques,”
in Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on
Mining Software Repositories Applications for Privacy
and Security, ser. MSR4P&S 2022.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p.
29–33. [Online]. Available:
035.3561184
[5] (2024) semgrep/semgrep: Lightweight static analysis for
many languages. find bug variants with patterns that
look like source code. Semgrep, Inc. [Online]. Available:

[6] I. GitHub. (2024) About codeql. [Online]. Available:

odeql/
[7] Y. Fu, P. Liang, A. Tahir, Z. Li, M. Shahin, and
J. Yu, “Security weaknesses of copilot generated code
in github,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2310.02059, 2023. [Online].
Available:
263609212
[8] H. Pearce, B. Ahmad, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and
R. Karri, “Asleep at the keyboard? assessing the security
of github copilot’s code contributions,” in 2022 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2022, pp. 754–
768.
[9] R. Khoury, A. R. Avila, J. Brunelle, and B. M. Camara,
“How secure is code generated by chatgpt?” 2023
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 2445–2451, 2023. [Online].
Available:
258212971
[10] CWE
-
common
weakness
enumeration.
[Online].
Available:
[11] M. Bhatt, S. Chennabasappa, C. Nikolaidis, S. Wan,
I. Evtimov, D. Gabi, D. Song, F. Ahmad, C. Aschermann,
L. Fontana, S. Frolov, R. P. Giri, D. Kapil, Y. Kozyrakis,