Constrained Auto-Regressive Decoding
Constrains Generative Retrieval

Zhaochun Ren∗

Shiguang Wu
Shandong University
Qingdao, China

Xin Xin
Shandong University
Qingdao, China

Leiden University
Leiden, The Netherlands

Jiyuan Yang
Shandong University
Qingdao, China

Mengqi Zhang
Shandong University
Qingdao, China

Zhumin Chen
Shandong University
Qingdao, China

arXiv:2504.09935v1 [cs.IR] 14 Apr 2025

Pengjie Ren∗

Maarten de Rijke
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Shandong University
Qingdao, China

(ii) For the beam search algorithm used during generation, we re-
veal that the usage of marginal distributions may not be an ideal
approach. Specifically, we prove that for sparse relevance distribu-
tions, beam search can achieve perfect top-1 precision but suffer
from poor top-𝑘recall performance. To support our theoretical find-
ings, we conduct experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets,
validating the existence of the error from adding constraints and
the recall performance drop due to beam search. This paper aims to
improve our theoretical understanding of the generalization capa-
bilities of the auto-regressive decoding retrieval paradigm, laying a
foundation for its limitations and inspiring future advancements
toward more robust and generalizable generative retrieval.

Abstract

Generative retrieval (GR) seeks to replace traditional search index
data structures with a single large-scale neural network, offering
the potential for improved efficiency and seamless integration with
generative large language models. As an end-to-end paradigm, GR
adopts a learned differentiable search index to conduct retrieval by
directly generating document identifiers through corpus-specific
constrained decoding. The generalization capabilities of generative
retrieval on out-of-distribution corpora have gathered significant
attention. Recent advances primarily focus on the problems aris-
ing from training strategies, and addressing them through various
learning techniques. However, the fundamental challenges of gen-
eralization arising from constrained auto-regressive decoding still
remain unexplored and systematically understudied.
In this paper, we examine the inherent limitations of constrained
auto-regressive generation from two essential perspectives: con-
straints and beam search. We begin with the Bayes-optimal setting
where the GR model exactly captures the underlying relevance
distribution of all possible documents. Then we apply the model
to specific corpora by simply adding corpus-specific constraints.
Our main findings are two-fold: (i) For the effect of constraints,
we derive a lower bound of the error, in terms of the KL diver-
gence between the ground-truth and the model-predicted step-wise
marginal distributions. This error arises due to the unawareness of
future constraints during generation and is shown to depend on
the average Simpson diversity index of the relevance distribution.

CCS Concepts

• Information systems →Retrieval models and ranking.

Keywords

Generative retrieval; Constrained decoding; Beam search

ACM Reference Format:
Shiguang Wu, Zhaochun Ren, Xin Xin, Jiyuan Yang, Mengqi Zhang, Zhumin
Chen, Maarten de Rijke, and Pengjie Ren. 2025. Constrained Auto-Regressive
Decoding Constrains Generative Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 48th Inter-
national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR ’25), July 13–18, 2025, Padua, Italy. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 13 pages.

∗Corresponding authors.

1
Introduction

The advent of generative models has catalyzed the emergence of
generative retrieval (GR) as a new paradigm in information retrieval.
GR provides a potential way to replace the conventional index struc-
ture, such as inverted index and vector-based index, with a single
large-scale neural network [34]. By integrating the retrieve-then-
rank pipeline into an end-to-end framework, GR offers the promise
of enhanced efficiency. Typically, GR adopts auto-regressive gen-
erative models, e.g., BART [23] and T5 [43], trained to generate
document identifiers (docIDs) given a query.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from
SIGIR ’25, Padua, Italy
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1592-1/2025/07

Generalization in neural information retrieval. Generaliza-
tion is a key problem in neural information retrieval models [16,
18, 50, 51, 56, 56, 59]. Similar to the scaling principle in large lan-
guage models (LLMs) [7], many dense retrieval approaches consider
training on a high-resource dataset and then evaluated on different
domains [18, 39, 44, 50, 51]. In particular, GTR [39] demonstrates
significant improvements in out-of-domain performance by success-
fully scaling up the model size and the training corpus. Unlike dense
retrieval, GR, as a retrieval paradigm itself, is much more concerned
with the generalization abilities to unseen corpora [2, 12, 26, 46].
Bayes-optimal generative retrieval. Given the success of gen-
erative LLMs, GR is expected to capture the universal relevance
distribution when trained on sufficiently large retrieval datasets.
While extensive studies have already proposed effective training
strategies at large scale [12, 26, 61, 62], the performance of an
ideal, viz. a Bayes-optimal GR model, on unseen corpora has not
been systematically studied. In this paper, we study an amortized
Bayes-optimal auto-regressive GR model that fully encapsulates
the underlying relevance distribution over the complete corpus
containing all possible documents. On top of this, we apply the
constrained auto-regressive generation process to provide a valid
docID in any given downstream corpus which is a subset of the
complete one.
Constrained beam search and generalization. The core com-
ponents of GR are the differentiable index and the generation of
docID [54]. In this paper, we focus on how the generation process
affects the generalization of GR. Most existing GR models adopt
constrained beam search to generate the top-𝑘docIDs as the default
retrieval strategy [46, 47, 49, 52]. However, Zeng et al. [62] point
out the pitfalls of this strategy, i.e., a greedy local search algorithm
is likely to prune false negative docIDs and may thus not be suffi-
cient for developing effective GR models. While these effects are
typically entangled with model errors in relevance prediction, the
impact of constrained beam search using a Bayes-optimal model
with the correct relevance distribution still remains unclear. Within
our setting, we address this gap by isolating and analyzing the
theoretical root of limitations of constrained auto-regressive beam
search.
Main findings. We study the inherent limitations from two es-
sential perspectives: constraints and beam search. (i) Constraints:
In Section 4.1, we derive a lower bound on the error, in terms of
the KL divergence between the ground-truth and model-predicted
step-wise marginal distributions. This error is influenced by the
concentration of the relevance distribution and arises from the
model’s lack of awareness of future constraints during generation.
(ii) Beam search: In Section 4.2, we show that the usage of marginal
distributions may not be suitable. We prove that for some sparse
relevance distribution with a thick tail, beam search can achieve
perfect top-1 precision, but poor top-𝑘recall performance. We are
aware of existing techniques on improving recall of GR model, and
summarize two directions based on our analysis: (i) aggregation, i.e.,
aggregating the relevant documents within a narrow branch, and
(ii) amplification, i.e., amplifying the scores of relevant documents
to be significantly large. Both directions are essentially meant to
provide a high concentration prior on the relevance distribution. We
show that although they are empirically beneficial for small scale
corpus, difficulty will arise if we aim to construct a Bayes-optimal

GR. Our results provide theoretical grounding of constrained beam
search in GR, and shows the inherent limitations of this retrieval
strategy towards a reliable Bayes-optimal GR model. Our results
also imply the importance of balancing concentration during model
training for mitigating this problem.
Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows: (i) We pro-
vide theoretical results concerning Bayes-optimal GR to determine
how constrained beam search affects the generalization. (ii) We
decompose the negative effect from two angles, constraints and
beam search, and identify a trade-off factor, i.e., the concentration
of relevance distribution. (iii) Our theoretical results are verified by
experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets.

2
Related work

Generative retrieval (GR) is an emerging direction in neural in-
formation retrieval, exploring the possibility of replacing traditional
index structures in retrieval systems with a single large-scale neural
networks [27, 54]. It leverages generative models to directly gen-
erate the relevant docIDs given a query. This paradigm originated
with Cao et al. [9], Metzler et al. [34] and has garnered consid-
erable attention [4, 30, 38, 46–49, 52, 55, 57, 61, 66, 67, 70] in the
information retrieval community.
Generalization remains a challenge for GR, especially when ap-
plied to out-of-distribution corpora [2, 11, 22, 27, 31, 32, 46]. Pre-
vious research attributes this challenges to limited model capac-
ity [22, 60], lack of learning in the docID construction [46, 57, 66],
and difficulties in learning semantic representations [47, 53]. In
contrast, our work focuses on the constrained auto-regressive de-
coding strategy widely applied in GR, which is crucial for adapting
GR models to new corpora dynamically. Our setting aligns closely
to the few-shot indexing approach [2], where a pre-trained LLM
generates docIDs solely based on its pre-trained knowledge and
generalization capabilities, without additional training. We treat
their method as a conceptual blueprint for a fully generalizable GR
system and aim to investigate the inference stage under this setting.
Updatable generative retrieval is another critical task on dynamic
corpora. The primary challenges indicate the cost of updating the
model with new documents and the catastrophic forgetting prob-
lem [11, 17, 21, 33]. Previous efforts have concentrated on devel-
oping efficient continual learning strategies by fixing the indexing
construction procedure. We consider an idealized scenario where
the model has full knowledge of all possible documents and focuses
solely on generating relevant docIDs on dynamic corpus.
Constrained decoding. Constrained decoding has been widely
studied for guiding machine learning models to produce outputs
that satisfy specific conditions [1, 37]. Instead of learning to sat-
isfy through training, constraints are more often preferable only
in the inference time due to the flexibility and efficiency. Nishino
et al. [40, 41] demonstrate the preservation of relative errors of
certain loss functions in realizable setting. We instead provide a
failure case via establishing the existence of a lower-bound error for
auto-regressive models operating under step-wise inference-time
constraints. Recent work on controllable text generation (CTG)
in LLMs [see, e.g., 65] also explores imposing constraints during
inference without updating the underlying model [10, 19, 35, 36].

Table 1: Glossary.

However, many of these approaches do not focus on strictly en-
forcing constraint satisfaction. A few studies [20, 63, 64] propose
methods to produce outputs that strictly adhere to constraints,
mainly hard keywords inclusion constraints, using tractable proba-
bilistic models or policy gradient techniques. Our work differs by
focusing on a specific corpus-level constraint, i.e., the set of valid
docIDs is sampled from the complete corpus, a problem unique to
retrieval tasks.
Beam search is a widely used heuristic algorithm for decoding
structured predictors and has been applied as a non-maximum in-
ner product search (MIPS) setup for large-scale retrieval systems
with explicit tree structures [24, 68, 69, 71]. Beam search is known
to have a performance deterioration, and only few works provided
theoretical insights into this issue. As far as we know, only Zhuo
et al. [71] demonstrate a training-test discrepancy in tree-structured
models using binary cross-entropy loss. They showed that pseudo-
labeling during training does not guarantee that beam search will
get the most relevant targets. In our work, we analyze the marginal
distribution of an auto-regressive distribution and provide a the-
oretical result on the top-1 and top-𝑘performance under sparse
relevance situations. Zhuo et al. [71] also provide a Bayes-optimal
tree structure, which is often called max-heap assumption [24],
and we will discuss the difficulty of enforcing this assumption in
our setting in Section 5. In GR, some work have reached the same
conclusion that beam search is not sufficient for retrieval as it is
likely to prune the relevant docIDs and the model is not able to
recover from this [26, 28, 62]. They propose to use a hybrid retrieval
strategy to help bypassing this problem. We instead focus on under-
standing the root cause of this problem, i.e., the usage of marginal
distribution.

Symbol
Description

𝑘, 𝑚
the vocabulary size and document length
D
the complete corpus, i.e., [𝑘]𝑚

D𝑐, 𝐶
downstream corpus and constraints
𝑓, 𝑓𝑐
Bayes-optimal and induced downstream GR
Pr(· | 𝑞)
relevance distribution given query 𝑞
𝑑= (𝑑1, . . . ,𝑑𝑚)
document in D

D𝑐is denoted as 𝑓𝑐. Note that a similar setting has recently been
proposed as zero-shot indexing [2].
Notation. Table 1 lists the main notation used in the paper. For
an integer 𝑛, we denote the set {1, . . . ,𝑛} by [𝑛]. We use bold face
to denote random variables. Tokens in a document 𝑑are integers
from [𝑘], making 𝑑∈[𝑘]𝑚, and 𝑘is the vocabulary size. We set the
complete corpus D = [𝑘]𝑚. We denote the underlying relevance
distribution over D given a query 𝑞as Pr(· | 𝑞), where 𝒅∼Pr(𝒅|
𝑞) = Î Pr(𝒅𝑖| 𝒅<𝑖,𝑞). For simplicity, we focus on a single query
𝑞and omit it in some context. We use subscripts to indicate a
sliced subset or operations at specific steps, i.e., □𝑖, and □≥𝑖, etc.
Particularly, we refer to D≥𝑖or D𝑐
≥𝑖a branch with root 𝑑𝑖, under
some prefix 𝑑<𝑖.
Downstream corpus and constraints. We construct the down-
stream corpus D𝑐by sampling. For simplicity, each document is
sampled with an equal probability 𝑝. In practice, the sampling is
agnostic to the future user queries, and thus independent with Pr(·).
We use 𝐶to be the event that 𝒅is in D𝑐, and Pr(· | 𝐶) is the distri-
bution under the corpus D𝑐. 𝐶𝑖means the 𝑖-th token of document
𝒅is valid with respect to the downstream corpus constraints, given
some context-clear prefix tokens 𝑑<𝑖, i.e., 𝑑𝑖is valid if it appears
in D𝑐for the prefix 𝑑<𝑖. We use “constraints”, and “downstream
corpus” to represent the result of sampling interchangeably. The
constrained generation process 𝑔𝑐
𝑖is applied at the 𝑖-th step of
𝑓. It first zeros out the invalid tokens and then re-normalizes the
remaining probabilities.

3
Preliminaries

We formulate GR and introduce key notations in this section.
Generative retrieval. Following Tay et al. [49], we formulate GR
where the mapping from documents and docIDs is one-to-one func-
tion. A corpus, denoted as D, is a set of documents 𝑑, with each
document represented as a sequence of tokens, i.e.,𝑑= (𝑑1, . . . ,𝑑𝑚),
where 𝑚is the length. In this paper, we assume all documents have
the same length. A generative retrieval model 𝑓, typically imple-
mented using a sequence-to-sequence architecture such as T5 [43]
or BART [23], generates a ranked list of the most relevant docIDs
in D for the given query. The ranking list is computed through
beam search during generation. To ensure the model reliably gen-
erates valid docIDs from the corpus, a constrained auto-regressive
decoding process 𝑔together with the beam search is used.
Bayes-optimal generative retrieval. We first assume the com-
plete corpus D contains all possible documents of length 𝑚. Any
downstream corpus is therefore a subset of D. We denote 𝑓as the
Bayes-optimal GR model on D which has the ability to predict
the ground-truth relevance distribution over D given any query.
The Bayes-optimal model 𝑓is considered as an ideal and oracle
prototype model which helps us understand the behavior of the
generation process. When 𝑓is applied to a downstream corpus
D𝑐⊂D, it uses the corresponding constrained decoding process
𝑔𝑐to predict relevant documents in D𝑐. This induced GR model on

4
Theoretical analysis

We investigate the inherent limitations of GR arising from con-
straints and beam search individually. Our analysis disentangles
these factors to isolate their individual effects. For constraints, we
analyze its effect on the marginal distribution at each generation
step. For beam search, we analyze how it independently degrades re-
call performance on the complete corpus, disregarding constraints.
These results are asymptotic with respect to the vocabulary size
𝑘. In Appendix A, we examine the required magnitude of 𝑘for a
sufficiently expressive model and show that it needs to be exponen-
tially large in terms of the ratio of raw document length and docID
length.

4.1
Constraints cause marginal distribution
mismatch

We begin by studying the effects of applying constraints to the
model performance. We first identify the factor that causes the
error during the generation. Then we quantitatively analyze the
magnitude of this error in (i) uniform, and (ii) general relevance
distribution given some query 𝑞. We consider the first generation

valid first tokens, but the ground-truth should be proportional to
the number of valid documents in each valid branch. Due to the
variance of the sampling, the ground-truth distribution will not be
exactly uniform.
General relevance distribution. Following the same idea of the
uniform case, we further give the result for general relevance dis-
tributions. The key is the Simpson diversity index [45], which is
used for measuring the degree of concentration. We introduce the
average Simpson diversity index. It is computed as the squared
expectation of root sum of squared probabilities Pr(𝑑| 𝑑1), i.e.,

step without loss of generality. Other cases can be reduced to it by
adjusting the document length 𝑚or vocabulary size 𝑘.
Unawareness of future constraints. Since 𝑓𝑐is unaware of the
constraints in the future steps, there may exist biases between the
distributions of complete corpus D and downstream corpus D𝑐.
Specifically, after applying constrained decoding 𝑔𝑐, 𝑓𝑐(𝑞) returns

Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞,𝐶1) = 𝑔𝑐[Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞)]
(1)

∝I[𝑑1 ∈D𝑐
1]
∑︁

Pr(𝑑1𝑑>1 | 𝑞),
(2)

∀𝑑>1∈D>1

where the 𝐶1 constraint is satisfied through 𝑔𝑐, and I[𝑑1 ∈D𝑐
1]
means 𝑑1 is a valid first token in the downstream corpus. In the
contrary, the ground-truth marginal distribution only sum over the
documents in D𝑐, so we have



𝑑
Pr(𝑑| 𝑑1)2


√︄∑︁

E2
𝑑1

.
(10)

Recall that each document is selected with probability 𝑝, and let
𝐴be the average Simpson diversity index, we have an asymptotic
lower bound of the KL divergence for large 𝑘in Eq. 11.

Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞,𝐶1,𝐶>1) = 𝑔𝑐[Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞,𝐶>1)]
(3)

∝I[𝑑1 ∈D𝑐
1]
∑︁

Pr(𝒅1𝑑>1 | 𝑞),
(4)

KL [Pr(· | 𝐶) ∥Pr(· | 𝐶𝑖)] ≳0.05𝐴

∀𝑑>1∈D𝑐
>1

𝑝
.
(11)

where Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞,𝐶1,𝐶>1) = Pr(𝒅1 | 𝑞,𝐶). Here we use the red mark
to highlight the differences from Eq. 2. Note that this gap would not
arise if the downstream corpus were preset, with both training and
inference performed on it, as the model would learn Pr(𝒅| 𝑞,𝐶)
directly. We then analyze the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence as
follows,1

For detailed illustration of the proof, see Theorem B.3. We also
show that the lower bound reaches its minimum in the uniform
relevance distribution case. Note that we have 𝐴≥
𝑘
| D| , where the
equality is obtained when Pr(·) is uniform. Let the selected corpus
size be 𝑘𝑟≈𝑝|D|, we have the same error shown in Eq. 9.
0.05𝐴

𝑝
≈0.05𝑘

|D|𝑝= 0.05

KL [Pr(· | 𝐶) ∥Pr(· | 𝐶1)]
(5)

𝑘𝑟−1 .
(12)


log Pr(𝒅1 | 𝐶)


(6)

= E𝒅1∼Pr(·|𝐶)

Note that for concentrated distribution, the Simpson diversity index
considerably exceeds 𝑝, resulting in a corresponding larger error.
In conclusion, we infer a lower bound of the KL divergence be-
tween the predicted and ground-truth marginal distribution. The
bound is proportional to the degree of concentration of the under-
lying relevance distribution.

Pr(𝒅1 | 𝐶1)

= E [log Pr(𝐶>1 | 𝒅1)] −log Pr(𝐶>1 | 𝐶1).
(7)

In Eq. 7, we see that the KL divergence is the gap between the
average proportion of constraints locally within each branch D𝑐
≥1
and the global average constraints. This indicates that the varia-
tion across branches may contribute the mismatch. Recall that we
construct our constraints via an i.i.d. sampling, and we have the
expectation of the constrained marginal distribution Pr(𝑑1 | 𝑞,𝐶1)
as follows:

4.2
The impact of beam search on recall

Beam search often fails to retain the correct top-𝑘prefix candidates,
resulting in the exclusion of relevant documents during genera-
tion [62]. We attribute this limitation to the usage of conditional
decomposition of the joint distribution over the corpus.
To formalize this analysis, we model the decomposition as a
tree where: (i) each node at layer 𝑖represents a token 𝑑𝑖generated
under a specific prefix 𝑑<𝑖, (ii) each sub-tree represents possible
continuations of a prefix, and (iii) the value of node 𝑑𝑖with prefix
𝑑<𝑖, denoted 𝑉(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖), equals Í
𝑑>𝑖Pr(𝑑≥𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖), i.e., the mar-
ginal probability Pr(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖). The property of this structure is that
node values represent marginal probabilities aggregated over all
possible future paths. However, the objective of the retrieval model
requires identifying specific document with maximal joint proba-
bility Pr(𝑑). This creates a fundamental mismatch: nodes with high
values 𝑉(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖) may not contain the hightest-joint-probability
documents in their sub-trees.
Non-relevant branches overtaking relevant ones. We setup a
scenario with a sparse relevance distribution to elucidate this issue.
We present how branches containing relevant documents can be
overtaken by non-relevant peer branches during generation. At
the first generation step, the model have to choose within 𝑘nodes,
each associated with a sub-tree of 𝑘𝑚−1 documents (leaves). We

E𝐶[Pr(𝑑1 | 𝑞,𝐶)] ∝E[I[𝒅∈D𝑐]] Pr(𝑑1 | 𝑞) ∝Pr(𝑑1 | 𝑞).
(8)

Therefore, the downstream corpus will follow the same distribution
as the complete corpus on average. However, as we will see in the
next, the gap is not concentrated at zero with high probability in
terms of KL divergence.
Uniform relevance distribution. We first give an example case
when the relevance distribution Pr(𝒅| 𝑞) is a uniform distribution.
If the size of the downstream corpus is 𝑘𝑟≪𝑘𝑚= |D|, we derive
an asymptotic lower bound of the error for large 𝑘as follows

KL [Pr(· | 𝐶) ∥Pr(· | 𝐶1)] ≳0.05

𝑘𝑟−1 .
(9)

In particular, we have a constant error 0.05 if the size is 𝑂(𝑘). For
detailed illustration of the proof, see Theorem B.2. Here is the
intuition: GR model will predict a uniform distribution over the

1The reason we adopt the KL divergence is that it is not only part of the training
loss, i.e., empirical cross-entropy, but also related to the ranking performance. Several
publications have showed that the cross-entropy is a bound of several commonly used
metrics, e.g., Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG) and Mean Reciprocal
Rank (MRR) [8, 58] for binary relevance score. KL divergence and cross-entropy only
differ by the entropy.

study the entropy of the corpus distribution Pr(·), which is de-
fined as H(𝒅) = −Í
𝑑∈D Pr(𝑑) log Pr(𝑑). It can be decomposed
into the entropy of the marginal distribution at each step, i.e.,
H(𝒅) = Í𝑚
𝑖=1 H(𝒅𝑖| 𝒅<𝑖). When the distribution is uniform, the en-
tropy is maximized, i.e., H(𝒅) = log |D| = 𝑚log𝑘. If we introduce
external prior knowledge to aggregate the relevant documents, the
relevant branches will stand out at a very early stage of generation,
and the entropy at that layer H(𝒅𝑖| 𝒅<𝑖) will be low and even ap-
proaching zero. The more aggregated the relevant documents are,
the lower the entropy becomes. In other words, for the same corpus
size, the model will waste more code space on redundant structures.
In practice, this approach for concentration is often realized by
conducting hierarchical clustering on the corpus, which has been
shown to be effective in small scale retrieval tasks. The trade-off
between concentration and redundancy can be ignored to some
extent when the corpus is small. However, if we would like to build
a Bayes-optimal GR model, learning a sufficiently large code space
is already expensive, see Appendix A. Effective concentration will
introduce more redundancy, which is computationally inefficient.

assign a logit uniformly sampled from [−1, 1] to each document in
the corpus. A subset of 𝜆𝑘≪|D| documents is randomly selected
as relevant, and each is assigned a logit within 𝑂(log𝑘± log log𝑘).
The exponential of each logit is the final relevance score of the
document, i.e., the score of the corresponding root-to-leaf path.
We prove that the recall of the top-𝜆𝑘valued branches is upper-
bounded by 0.5+𝑜(1) with high probability. This indicates that many
relevant branches are excluded from the highest-valued branches.
However, the top-1 branch is highly likely to contain the most rel-
evant documents. A detailed formal statement and proof of this
result is provided in Theorem C.1 in Appendix C. The thickness
of the tail distribution or the sharpness of relevant branches de-
termines the probability of overtaking. If the scores for relevant
branches are sufficiently high, this issue becomes less pronounced.
In summary, GR models relying on the sum of sub-tree values
for ranking branches struggle to achieve high recall performance
while maintaining top-1 precision.

4.3
Concentration as a trade-off factor

We find a common dependence on the concentration of relevance
distribution from both components, i.e., the Simpson diversity in-
dex, and the thickness of the tail distribution. However, the con-
centration takes effect in opposite directions. Less concentrated
distribution is more stable against sampling and thus have better
alignment with the ground-truth constrained marginal distribution.
In contrast, high concentration reduces the false positive branches
and thus improve the recall performance using beam search, but it
requires an accurate marginal distribution.

5.2
Amplification requires high-quality data

We treat the amplification strategy as an approximation of the
max-heap structure discussed in Li et al. [24]. In this structure, the
value of each node is the maximum value of its children instead
of the sum, i.e., 𝑉(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖) = max𝑑>𝑖Pr(𝑑𝑖,𝑑>𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖). One can
prove that this structure can achieve perfect recall performance
by preserving the relevant documents in the top-𝑛branches [71].
Note that this structure is no longer a chain decomposition of the
joint distribution, and the distribution at each step is different from
the original distribution. The new distribution can still be learned
through empirical risk minimization by carefully filtering the train-
ing data. Considering the 𝑖-th step, the negative log-likelihood loss
is as follows:

5
Difficulty of concentration in Bayes-optimal
GR

While increasing the degree of concentration is a promising ap-
proach to improve recall performance on the complete corpus—if
the effects of constraints are ignored—achieving this in the context
of Bayes-optimal GR is still challenging. In this section, we show
details about the challenge in the context of Bayes-optimal GR in
two directions:

L𝑖(𝜃) = −
∑︁

𝑑∈˜D
log Pr(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖;𝜃),
(13)

where ˜D is the training set, and 𝜃is the model parameter to be
optimized. In order to learn the max-heap structure, the predicted
distribution Pr(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖;𝜃) should be proportional to 𝑉(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖).
Therefore the loss function should filter out the non-maximum
successors in the training set, i.e.,

(1) Aggregation: Aggregating relevant documents within a narrow
branch to ensure that its value significantly exceeds that of
others throughout the generation process.
(2) Amplification: Amplifying the scores of relevant documents
relative to non-relevant ones, so that the branch value serves
as a reliable sketch for branch quality.

L𝑖(𝜃) =−
∑︁

𝑑∈˜D
I[𝑑∈arg max Pr(𝑑>𝑖| 𝑑≤𝑖)] log Pr(𝑑𝑖| 𝑑<𝑖;𝜃). (14)

While these strategies have shown their effectiveness [24, 61] on
small scale, in-domain datasets, they are much more challenging
to implement in Bayes-optimal GR models. Specifically, as we will
discuss, achieving this concentrated structure requires additional
computational and data resources beyond those needed to obtain
the Bayes-optimal model itself. Detailed discussions are shown in
the following.

As we can see, only the most relevant successors are allowed to
contribute to the loss function. It not only needs to throw away
large amounts of data but also requires more high-quality data and
careful filtering strategies. Most retrieval models can be seen to be
trained on this loss [24], as they are only trained on the labeled
relevant documents. However, the quality and quantity of retrieval
data are often limited considering that the amount of data needed
for a generative model is generally much larger than that for a
discriminative model.

5.1
Aggregation introduces redundancy

Although the corpus size |D| = 𝑘𝑚is sufficiently large, the model
does not necessarily fully utilize the entire code space. Here we

7

k = 28

0.14

A = 1.00
A = 0.04
A = 3.27e −04
A = 1.91e −05
A = 1.43e −06
Lower Bound

k = 210

6

0.12

k = 212

KL Divergence

KL Divergence

k = 214

5

0.10

Lower Bound

4

0.08

3

0.06

2

0.04

1

0.02

0.19

0

0.00

29
211
213
215
217
219

212
214
216
218
220
222
224

Size of Downstream Corpus

Size of Downstream Corpus

Figure 1: The KL divergence error in the first generation
step on synthetic uniform relevance distribution data with
uniformly sampled downstream corpus.

Figure 2: The KL divergence error in the first generation step
on several synthetic relevance distribution data with differ-
ent degrees of concentration. The vocabulary size is 210, the
docID length is 3. 𝐴is the Simpson diversity index of the rele-
vance distribution. As for highly concentrated distributions,
e.g., 𝐴= 1, and 𝐴= 0.04, the Lyapunov’s condition will no
longer hold (see Theorem B.3 for more details), we do not
draw their lower bounds.

6
Synthetic experiments

In this section, we experimentally verify the theoretical results
and investigate scenarios beyond the assumed data distributions
presented in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2.

6.1
Effects of constraints

1.0

is 1.0 for all k
k = 28

Branches

Uniform relevance distribution. We begin by simulating the
case of a uniform relevance distribution, as discussed in Section 4.1.
Since the lower bound is expressed in terms of the size of the
downstream corpus, we vary its size to observe the behavior across
different vocabulary sizes. We choose a sufficiently large 𝑚so that
the complete corpus of size 𝑘𝑚is much larger than the downstream
corpus. For a downstream corpus of size 𝑛, the sampling probability
is given by 𝑝=
𝑛
𝑘𝑚. The simulation results are shown in Figure 1.
As illustrated, the KL divergence for different 𝑘values exhibits
a consistent decreasing trend. For a fixed downstream corpus size,
a smaller 𝑘results in significantly lower error. This is expected,
as a smaller 𝑘leads to each branch covering a larger number of
selected documents, thereby reducing variance. In this case, the
model-predicted marginal distribution closely follows the actual
one.
General relevance distribution. Next, we simulate the case of
general relevance distributions, as described in Section 4.1. For sim-
plicity, we ensure that each branch has the same Simpson diversity
index. We assign random weights to documents within the range
[1,𝑒100], where the assignment probability decreases exponentially
with larger weights. The concentration of the distribution is con-
trolled by varying the rate of decrease: slower rates result in less
concentrated distributions, corresponding to smaller Simpson di-
versity indices. When the Simpson diversity index approaches 1,
our lower bound no longer holds.
The simulation results are shown in Figure 2. Compared to the
uniform distribution case, the KL divergence is significantly larger
and decreases more slowly as the downstream corpus size increases.
For data with a Simpson diversity index approaching 1, the KL
divergence reaches approximately 6. In contrast, the uniform case
consistently maintains a very low KL divergence. For example, the
lowest Simpson diversity index in the figure is around 1𝑒−06, which
matches the magnitude of the uniform distribution,
1
220 ≈1𝑒−06,
and the corresponding KL divergence is approximately 0.19, as seen
in Figure 1.

k = 210

0.9

k = 212

k = 214

0.8

0.5 + max(0, 0.65 −0.15
λ )

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.05
0.1
0.2
0.8
1.5
λ

Figure 3: The recall of relevant branches cut off at the total
number of relevant branches in the first generation step. The
synthetic relevance distribution is constructed as Section 4.2.
The total number of sampled relevant document is 𝜆𝑘. The
size of each branch is fixed as 𝑛= 225.

6.2
Effects of beam search

Verification of theoretical results. We first construct a sparse
relevance distribution as outlined in Section 4.2. The results are
presented in Figure 3. We evaluate the recall of relevant branches
under varying values of 𝜆, which controls the number of relevant
documents sampled. Specifically, we compute how many relevant
branches are preserved in the top positions during the first gener-
ation step. We also examine large 𝜆values, which are beyond the
scope of Theorem C.1.
For small 𝜆, the recall performance is approximately 0.5. For
larger 𝜆values, the recall still aligns with the theoretical bounds. In
all cases, the remains consistently perfect. Regarding
score magnitudes, as each branch has a fixed size of𝑛= 225, relevant
documents achieve scores around 𝑒8.6 ≈5400, while non-relevant
documents score around 𝑒1 ≈2.7.
Effects on different degrees of concentration. We also inves-
tigate the impact of varying the sharpness of the relevance distri-
bution by introducing a temperature parameter 𝑇. For a document

1.0

k = 28

0.4
dl20
dl19
dev

Branches

0.3

k = 210

k = 212

0.8

KL Divergence

0.3

k = 214

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.0

0.0

1
10
50
75
90
100
Ratio of selected docs (%)

1
10
50
75
90
100
Ratio of selected docs (%)

0.0

0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1.0
1.05
1.1
1.2
Temperature

(a) Uniform sampling

(b) Non-uniform sampling

Figure 4: The recall of relevant branches cut off at the total
number of relevant branches in the first generation step. The
synthetic relevance distribution is constructed as Section 4.2.
The total number of sampled relevant document is 0.05𝑘. The
size of each branch is fixed as 𝑛= 225.

Figure 5: The KL divergence error in the first generation step
on MS MARCO V1 passage corpus. A subset of top-10, 000
rank list from SLIM++ [25] is treated as the complete corpus,
and the downstream corpus is (a) uniformly sampled, or (b)
sampled with the relevance distribution.

with logit 𝑠, the score is computed as exp(𝑠/𝑇). Lower tempera-
tures increase the gap between scores for relevant and non-relevant
documents. The results are shown in Figure 4.
Our findings reveal that recall performance is highly sensitive
to temperature, achieving perfection within a narrow range. This
confirms the advantage of constructing GR models that capture
concentrated distributions effectively.

dl20
dl19
dev

0.04

0.8

KL Divergence

0.03

0.6

0.02

0.4

0.01

0.2

6.3
Summary

0.00

0.0

The results from the synthetic data distributions validate the theo-
retical findings presented in earlier sections. Although these syn-
thetic settings are not practical for real-world scenarios, they pro-
vide a controlled environment to clearly demonstrate the negative
effects of constrained decoding and beam search.
7
Experiments on real-world dataset
7.1
Experimental setups

1
11
33
56
79
Ratio of selected docs (%)

1
11
33
56
79
Ratio of selected docs (%)

(a) Uniform sampling

(b) Non-uniform sampling

Figure 6: The KL divergence error in the first generation step
on MS MARCO V1 passage corpus. The relevance distribu-
tion is constructed as Section 7.1. The downstream corpus
is (a) uniformly sampled, or (b) sampled with the relevance
distribution.

Document identifier design. For the docID design, we adopt the
codebook and semantic ID mapping from Zeng et al. [61], which
introduces the first effective GR model that outperforms conven-
tional retrieval models on the full MS MARCO passage corpus [3].
The codebook size is set to 256.
Datasets. We evaluate our approach using the MS MARCO V1
passage corpus [3], which contains 8.8 million passages, along with
three evaluation datasets: (i) MS MARCO-dev, consisting of 7k
queries; (ii) TREC DL 2019 [14], with 43 queries; and (iii) TREC DL
2020 [13], with 54 queries.
Relevance distribution. While recent advance improves GR per-
formance [61], there remains a gap compared to state-of-the-art
models. We use SLIM++ [25] to compute relevance scores due to
its strong overall performance on the MS MARCO V1 passage
re-ranking leaderboard.2 We use the top-10, 000 scores and extrap-
olate the remaining scores by taking 1% of the lowest score from
the ranked list, adding small Gaussian perturbations.
7.2
Effect of constraints

relevance distribution. In practice, sampling should remain agnostic
to future relevance, but this analysis illustrates what occurs if the
downstream corpus distribution aligns with the complete corpus.
For uniform sampling, Figures 5(a) and 6(a) depict the KL di-
vergence across varying complete corpus sizes. We observe that
the error decreases rapidly as the size of the downstream corpus
increases. For small 𝑘, the Simpson diversity index in each branch
is lower due to the higher number of elements, which helps reduce
the KL divergence as defined in Eq. 11.
In contrast, for non-uniform sampling, Figures 5(b) and 6(b) show
that the error is substantially higher than in the uniform case. Non-
uniform sampling introduces greater variance and exacerbates the
mismatch between distributions.

7.3
Effect of beam search

We evaluate recall performance by examining the retrieval of rele-
vant branches. The cutoff is set to the number of relevant documents,
which does not exceed the number of relevant branches. Results
are presented in Table 2. The recall is relatively low, indicating that
branches containing highly relevant documents may not always be

We examine two sampling strategies: uniform sampling, as dis-
cussed in previous sections, and sampling directly based on the

2MS MARCO V1 Passage Regressions are available at Pyserini.

Based on our findings, practitioners in the field may consider
balancing the degree of concentration when designing and train-
ing GR model, and using post-calibration to fix the errors when
using the model on a downstream corpus. Other forms of decoding
strategies beyond constrained beam search are also suggested.
As to future work, we will continue to study how these results
can be used for analyzing training properties of corpus-specific
GR models. Incorporating learnable decoding strategies during the
training of a differentiable search index may also be of interest in
this field.

retrieved within the top-𝑘branches. However, the top-1 precision
is higher, particularly for the MS MARCO-dev evaluation set.
Table 2: and of relevant branches
(256 in total) at the first generation step, which are denoted
as and The highest 50 documents are labeled
relevant, and the branches contain these documents are la-
beled relevant. The relevance distribution is constructed in
Section 7.1.

Model

TREC DL 19
53.7
69.8
TREC DL 20
63.3
75.9
MS MARCO-dev
67.5
90.5

Acknowledgments

Shiguang Wu gratefully acknowledges Yixiao Yu for insightful dis-
cussions regarding Lemma B.1, which were pivotal in establishing
the first main result of this work. This research was (partially)
funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China (62472261,
62372275, 62272274, 62202271, T2293773), the National Key R&D
Program of China with grant No. 2024YFC3307300 and No. 2022YFC-
3303004, the Provincial Key R&D Program of Shandong Province
with grant No. 2024CXGC010108, the Natural Science Foundation
of Shandong Province with grant No. ZR2024QF203, the Technol-
ogy Innovation Guidance Program of Shandong Province with
grant No. YDZX2024088, the Hybrid Intelligence Center, a 10-year
program funded by the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and
Science through the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Re-
search, project LESSEN with
project number NWA.1389.20.183 of the research program NWA
ORC 2020/21, which is (partly) financed by the Dutch Research
Council (NWO), project ROBUST with project number KICH3.LTP.-
20.006, which is (partly) financed by the Dutch Research Council
(NWO), DPG Media, RTL, and the Dutch Ministry of Economic
Affairs and Climate Policy (EZK) under the program LTP KIC 2020-
2023, and the FINDHR (Fairness and Intersectional Non-Discrimi-
nation in Human Recommendation) project that received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innova-
tion program under grant agreement No 101070212. All content
represents the opinion of the authors, which is not necessarily
shared or endorsed by their respective employers and/or sponsors.

7.4
Summary

Our experimental results demonstrate that the theoretical findings
reveal the negative effects of constrained beam search under real-
world dataset distributions to some extent. Since Zeng et al. [61]
designed and trained the GR model specifically on the MS MARCO
passage corpus, the docID structure is highly adapted to that query-
document training distribution. Additionally, the size of the MS
MARCO corpus is far from ideal for representing a complete corpus.
As a result, the experimental findings only provide an approximate
reflection of the theoretical results.3

8
Limitations

Concerning the theoretical aspects of our work, as we do not have
an evidence of what an optimal GR model should look like, we fail
to provide practical assumptions on the relevance distribution and
the structure of docID. Our results are sensitive to the parameters
and assumptions, e.g., the sharpness of the relevance distribution
for Theorem C.1, and may not accurately reflect practical real-world
situations. Besides, we have not studied how the two factors affect
each other when using constrained beam search.
Concerning the experimental aspects of our work, we only use
the docID from Zeng et al. [61] and the MS MARCO V1 passage
corpus.
9
Conclusion

Appendix
A
On the magnitude of vocabulary size

In this paper, we have provided theoretical results on the effect of
constrained beam search for a Bayes optimal GR model. We have
considered two separate aspects, constraints and beam search, and
examine the root cause of the negative effect on generalization. Both
aspects are intrinsically connected to the degree of concentration
of the relevance distribution across the complete corpus. When it is
more concentrated, the model achieves decent recall performance,
provided the marginal distribution aligns closely with the actual
one. However, applying downstream corpus constraints increases
this marginal distribution gap at the same time. To validate our
theoretical findings, we have conducted experiments on synthetic
and real-world dataset and have shown the case beyond the as-
sumed conditions in the theorem. Overall, we give a systematical
investigation from both theory and experiments to the limitation
of constrained decoding on retrieval generalization.

In this work, we use a sequence of tokens as the docID to repre-
sent the document as a general case. In order for the GR model to
generate the docID of relevant documents, the docID faithfully rep-
resenting the semantic information is highly perfered. Therefore,
the vocabulary size of the docID is a key factor to determine the
capacity of the GR model. In this section, we will give a brief per-
spective of its magnitude by considering the average information
content in real-world documents.
Bits per byte (bpb) is a widely used metric to measure the infor-
mation content of a document. It is defined as the number of bits
required to encode the content in a lossless way. Let 𝛼be the bpb of
general English text, and 𝑛be the length (in bytes) of a document.
The information content of the document is 𝑛𝛼bits on average.
Since the vocabulary size of the GR model is 𝑘, the maximum aver-
age information in a single token is log2 𝑘bits. Each docID has 𝑚

3The source code is available at
in-gr.

and |𝑍−𝑚𝑝𝑞| ≤𝛿𝑚𝑝𝑞, we set 𝛿= 𝑜(1) and 𝛿2𝑘= 𝑘𝑂(1), and have

tokens, so there will be 𝑚log2 𝑘bits in total. One would expect that
the information content of the docID should be larger than the one
of the document, i.e., 𝑚log2 𝑘≥𝑛𝛼, which implies 𝑘≥2
𝑛𝛼

𝑑TV(𝑃,𝑄) ≥|𝑃(𝐴𝑛) −𝑄(𝐴𝑛)|
(25)

𝑚. From
OpenAI [42] and several publications [6, 29], the bpb is usually
around 1. For a document of length 512 bytes, and our docID length
𝑚is 32, the vocabulary size 𝑘should be about 216𝛼≈65, 536. This
is about the same size of the vocabulary in a language model. The
size of the complete corpus is astronomically high, and for a regular
size downstream corpus, the sampling probability is approaching
zero, and will raise large KL divergence according to Section 4.1.
This is similar to the case where we want to use the language model
as GR model and some textual content as the docID.

≥𝑛𝑌𝑛

𝑍
−𝑌𝑛

𝑌1
(26)

≥(1 −𝛿)𝑛E[𝑌𝑛]

(1 + 𝛿)𝑘𝑚𝑝
−(1 + 𝛿)E[𝑌𝑛]

(1 −𝛿)E[𝑌1]
(27)

≃1 −Φ(1)
√𝑚𝑝
.
(28)

where 𝑑TV(𝑃,𝑄) = sup𝐴⊆[𝑘] |𝑃(𝐴) −𝑄(𝐴)| is the total variation
distance of two distributions.
Lastly, we use Pinsker’s inequality [15] to give the asymptotic
lower bound in Eq. 17,

B
Lower bound of KL divergence

KL [𝑃∥𝑄] ≥2𝑑TV(𝑃,𝑄)2 ≳0.05

𝑚𝑝.
□

Lemma B.1 (Lower bound of KL divergence between Bino-
mial and uniform distribution). Let 𝑺𝑖∼Binomial(𝑚, 𝑝), where
𝑖∈[𝑘], and 𝑍= Í𝑘
𝑖=1 𝑆𝑖. We define a normalized distribution 𝑃as

Theorem B.2 (Lower bound of KL divergence for uniform
relevance distribution.). Let 𝑟= 𝑚−1 and the sampling proba-
bility 𝑝=
1
𝑘𝑟−𝑠. Pr(·) is a uniform distribution. We have, for the KL
divergence in Eq. 7,

𝑃𝑖B 𝑆𝑖

𝑍,𝑖∈[𝑘],
(15)

KL [Pr(·|𝐶) ∥Pr(·|𝐶𝑖)] ≳0.05

𝑘𝑠.
(29)

and a uniform distribution 𝑄on supp(𝑃) B {𝑖|𝑆𝑖> 0} as

Here 𝑠is small and hence the right hand side converges slowly with
respect to 𝑘. When 𝑠= 0, we have a constant lower bound 0.05.

(
1
|supp(𝑃) | ,
if 𝑆𝑖> 0

𝑄𝑖B

0,
otherwise
(16)

Proof. We consider each possible token𝑑1 ∈[𝑘] at first position.
Since the selection of each document follows Bernoulli(𝑝), the
number of documents selected with first token being 𝑑1 follows
Binomial(𝑘𝑟, 𝑝). As the GR model can only consider the constraint
in the current step, it will return a uniform distribution over the
valid 𝑑1 tokens. By revoking Lemma B.1, we have the lower bound.
□

Then, we have a lower bound of the KL divergence between 𝑃and 𝑄
for large 𝑘,

𝑄𝑖
≳0.05

𝑖
𝑃𝑖ln 𝑃𝑖

KL [𝑃∥𝑄] =
∑︁

𝑚𝑝.
(17)

Proof. By the De Moivre–Laplace theorem [5], as 𝑘grows large,
for 𝑛in the neighborhood of 𝑚𝑝, we have

Theorem B.3 (Lower bound of KL divergence for general
relevance distribution). Let 𝑆𝑖𝑗be a weighted Bernoulli random
variable, with parameter 𝑝and weight 𝑤𝑖𝑗, where 𝑖∈[𝑘] and 𝑗∈
[𝑛]. Suppose for some 𝛿> 0, {𝑆𝑖𝑗| 𝑗∈[𝑛]} satisfy Lyapunov’s
condition [5], i.e.,

𝑺𝑖∼N (𝑚𝑝,𝑚𝑝𝑞), 𝑝+ 𝑞= 1.
(18)

Therefore, let 𝑛= 𝑚𝑝+ √𝑚𝑝𝑞, we have

lim
𝑛→∞
𝑝𝑞2+2𝛿+ 𝑝2+2𝛿𝑞

𝑗
𝑤2+2𝛿
𝑖𝑗
= 0.
(30)

∑︁

Pr[𝑆𝑖≥𝑛] ≃1 −Φ(1).
(19)

Í
𝑗𝑤2
𝑖𝑗𝑝𝑞
1+𝛿

Next, we focus on 𝑺𝑖that deviates from the mean. Let 𝐴𝑛B {𝑆𝑖≥
𝑛} be the deviated elements, and 𝑌𝑛= |𝐴𝑛|, we have

We define 𝑃and 𝑄similar to Theorem B.2, as

𝑃[𝑖] = 𝑆𝑖

𝑍,
𝑄[𝑖] = 𝑤𝑖

𝑊,
(31)

𝑃(𝐴𝑛) =
Í
𝑖𝑆𝑖I[𝑆𝑖≥𝑛]

𝑍
≥𝑛𝑌𝑛

𝑍, and
(20)

where 𝑍= Í𝑘
𝑖=1 𝑆𝑖and 𝑊= Í𝑘
𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖. We have a lower bound of the
KL divergence between 𝑃and 𝑄for large 𝑘,

𝑄(𝐴𝑛) =
Í
𝑖I[𝑆𝑖≥𝑛]
Í
𝑖I[𝑆𝑖≥1] = 𝑌𝑛

𝑌1
.
(21)

KL [𝑃∥𝑄] ≳0.05E2[𝐴𝑖]

𝑝
,
(32)

Since

where 𝐴2
𝑖= Í
𝑗𝑤2
𝑖𝑗/𝑤2
𝑖.

E[𝑍] = 𝑘𝑚𝑝,
(22)

Proof. Here we use the Lyapunov central limit theorem [5], to
approximate the distribution of 𝑊′
𝑖. We have

E[𝑌𝑛] = 𝑘Pr[𝑆𝑖≥𝑛] = 𝑂(𝑘),
(23)

E[𝑌1] = 𝑘(1 −Pr[𝑆𝑖= 0]) ≃𝑘

1 −𝑒−𝑘𝑠
,
(24)

𝑆𝑖∼N 𝑤𝑖𝑝, 𝑝𝑞𝑤2
𝑖𝐴2
𝑖
= N (𝜇𝑖, 𝜎2
𝑖), 𝑝+ 𝑞= 1.
(33)

by the multiplicative Chernoff bound, with probability at least
1 −exp(−𝛿2Ω(𝑘)), |𝑌𝑛−E[𝑌𝑛]| ≤𝛿E[𝑌𝑛], |𝑌1 −E[𝑌1]| ≤𝛿E[𝑌1],

As we have done in Theorem B.2, we choose a subset of [𝑘] to
compute a lower bound of total variation distance. Let 𝐼= {𝑖| 𝑆𝑖≥

𝜇𝑖+ 𝜎𝑖}, 𝛿= 𝑜(1) and 𝑘𝛿2 = 𝑘𝑂(1), we have, with probability at
least 1 −3 exp −2𝛿2𝑘2

than the barrier. The result mainly comes from the carefully designed
score of relevant documents which is linear in 𝑛. It may not hold
for extremely skewed distribution of scores, e.g., the relevant score is
exponentially large, which actually corresponds to the “amplification”
discussed in Section 5.

𝐵2
, where 𝐵= Í
𝑖∈[𝑘] 𝑤2
𝑖,

𝑑TV(𝑃,𝑄) ≥|𝑃(𝐼) −𝑄(𝐼)|
(34)

≥
Í
𝑖∈𝐼𝑆𝑖

𝑍
−
Í
𝑖∈𝐼𝑤𝑖

𝑊
(35)

Í
𝑖∈[𝑘] 𝑤𝑖𝐴𝑖
Í
𝑖∈[𝑘]𝑤𝑖
.
(36)

≳0.16
√𝑝

If we set 𝑊= 1, it can be simplified as 0.16E[𝐴𝑖]
√𝑝
.
□

C
Recall performance using beam search

Theorem C.1 (Top-𝜆𝑘recall and top-1 precision of data
model in Section 4.2). Suppose we have 𝑘branches, each with
𝑛= 𝑘𝑚−1 documents (leaves). We randomly select 𝜆𝑘docs from all
branches as the relevant ones, where 𝜆≪1. We assign each non-
relevant doc a score uniformly at random from [−1, 1], and each
relevant doc from [𝛿−Δ,𝛿+ Δ], where 𝛿= 0.5 log(0.8𝑛), and Δ =
𝑂(0.5 log log𝑘). We then take the exponential of the score for each
doc and use the sum of the scores as the ranking score for each branch.
Then, we have the following results with high probability:

(1) The top-𝜆𝑘recall is lower than 0.5 + max{0.65 −0.15/𝜆, 0}.
(2) The top-1 precision is 1.

Proof. First, we show the distribution of values for non-relevant
branches. For each non-relevant branch, the score 𝑆is the sum of 𝑛
i.i.d. random variables from 𝒀𝑖= 𝑒𝑿𝑖, where 𝑿𝑖∼Uniform(−1, 1).
As E[𝒀] ≈1.175, and V[𝒀] ≈0.4, we have E[𝑺] = 1.175𝑛and
V[𝑺] = 0.4𝑛. According to the central limit theorem, the distri-
bution of 𝑆is approximately N (1.175𝑛, 0.4𝑛). Therefore, for two
non-relevant branches, the difference of their scores is approxi-
mately N (0, 0.8𝑛), and Pr[𝑆1 −𝑆2 ≥
√

0.8𝑛] ≈0.15.
Next, we estimate the number of relevant branches. As the pro-
portion 𝑝= 𝜆𝑘

𝑘𝑛is small, and 𝑛𝑝= 𝜆, we can approximate the
number of relevant docs, #𝑹, in each branch as a Poisson distribu-
tion with parameter 𝜆. Then we have Pr[#𝑹= 0] = 𝑒−𝜆≈1 −𝜆,
and Pr[#𝑹= 1] = 𝜆𝑒−𝜆≈𝜆, Therefore, there are aproximately 𝜆𝑘
relevant branches and 𝑘−𝜆𝑘non-relevant branches.
We consider a barrier 𝐵= 1.175𝑛+
√

0.8𝑛and the event that some
non-relevant branches are above the barrier and half of relevant
branches are below the barrier. According to the data model, with
high probability, half of the relevant documents have a score below
√

0.8𝑛. Since each non-relevant branch has a probability of 0.15 to
exceed another by
√

0.8𝑛, we have that, with high probability, at
least 0.15(𝑘−𝜆𝑘) non-relevant branches will exceed one of the
low-score relevant branches. Thus at most 0.5𝜆𝑘+ max{0.5𝜆𝑘−
0.15(𝑘−𝜆𝑘), 0} relevant branches will be in the top-𝜆𝑘. Then the
recall is at most 0.5 + max{0.65 −0.15/𝜆, 0}.
For the top-1 precision, the maximum score of the relevant doc-
uments can approach 𝛿+ Δ w.h.p. And for a normal distribution 𝑫
with mean 0 and variance 𝛿2 = 0.8𝑛, Pr
𝑫

𝜖𝑒−𝜖2/2). If
we let 𝜖= 𝑒Δ, we have that the probability there is a non-relevant
branch exceeding by 𝑒Δ√

𝛿≥𝜖

≤𝑂( 1

0.8𝑛is 𝑜(1). Then w.h.p. the top-1 preci-
sion is 1.
□

Remark C.2. In fact, the recall will be lower than 0.5 if 𝜆is small
enough because more non-relevant branches will be much higher

References

acl-long.99
[17] Jiafeng Guo, Changjiang Zhou, Ruqing Zhang, Jiangui Chen, Maarten de Ri-
jke, Yixing Fan, and Xueqi Cheng. 2024. CorpusBrain++: A Continual Gen-
erative Pre-Training Framework for Knowledge-Intensive Language Tasks.
arXiv:2402.16767 [cs.IR]
[18] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ledell Wu,
Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense Passage Retrieval for
Open-Domain Question Answering. In EMNLP. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 6769–6781.
[19] Minbeom Kim, Hwanhee Lee, Kang Min Yoo, Joonsuk Park, Hwaran Lee, and
Kyomin Jung. 2023. Critic-Guided Decoding for Controlled Text Generation. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Anna Rogers,
Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 4598–4612. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.281
[20] Minbeom Kim, Thibaut Thonet, Jos Rozen, Hwaran Lee, Kyomin Jung, and
Marc Dymetman. 2024. Guaranteed Generation from Large Language Mod-
els. arXiv:2410.06716 [cs.CL]
[21] Varsha Kishore, Chao Wan, Justin Lovelace, Yoav Artzi, and Kilian Q. Weinberger.
2023. IncDSI: incrementally updatable document retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA)
(ICML’23). JMLR.org, Article 704, 13 pages.
[22] Hyunji Lee, JaeYoung Kim, Hoyeon Chang, Hanseok Oh, Sohee Yang, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Yi Lu, and Minjoon Seo. 2023. Nonparametric Decoding for Gen-
erative Retrieval. In ACL (Findings). Association for Computational Linguistics,
12642–12661.
[23] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman
Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. BART:
Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation,
Translation, and Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, Dan
Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R. Tetreault (Eds.). Association
for Computational Linguistics, 7871–7880. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.ACL-MAIN.703
[24] Haitao Li, Qingyao Ai, Jingtao Zhan, Jiaxin Mao, Yiqun Liu, Zheng Liu, and
Zhao Cao. 2023.
Constructing Tree-based Index for Efficient and Effective
Dense Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Taipei, Taiwan) (SI-
GIR ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 131–140.
doi:10.1145/3539618.3591651
[25] Minghan Li, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Xueguang Ma, and Jimmy Lin. 2023. SLIM: Sparsi-
fied Late Interaction for Multi-Vector Retrieval with Inverted Indexes. In Proceed-
ings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (Taipei, Taiwan) (SIGIR ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1954–1959. doi:10.1145/3539618.3591977
[26] Xiaoxi Li, Zhicheng Dou, Yujia Zhou, and Fangchao Liu. 2024. CorpusLM: To-
wards a Unified Language Model on Corpus for Knowledge-Intensive Tasks.
In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2024, Washington DC, USA, July 14-18,
2024, Grace Hui Yang, Hongning Wang, Sam Han, Claudia Hauff, Guido Zuccon,
and Yi Zhang (Eds.). ACM, 26–37. doi:10.1145/3626772.3657778
[27] Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Yujia Zhou, Yuyao Zhang, Peitian Zhang, Yutao Zhu, and
Zhicheng Dou. 2024. From Matching to Generation: A Survey on Generative
Information Retrieval. CoRR abs/2404.14851 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2404.
14851 arXiv:2404.14851
[28] Xiaoxi Li, Yujia Zhou, and Zhicheng Dou. 2024. UniGen: A Unified Generative
Framework for Retrieval and Question Answering with Large Language Models.
In Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-
Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024,
Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI
2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada, Michael J. Wooldridge, Jennifer G.
Dy, and Sriraam Natarajan (Eds.). AAAI Press, 8688–8696. doi:10.1609/AAAI.
V38I8.28714
[29] Yucheng Li, Yunhao Guo, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. 2024. Evaluating
Large Language Models for Generalization and Robustness via Data Compression.
arXiv:2402.00861 [cs.CL]
[30] Yongqi Li, Nan Yang, Liang Wang, Furu Wei, and Wenjie Li. 2024. Learning
to Rank in Generative Retrieval. In Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances
in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada,
Michael J. Wooldridge, Jennifer G. Dy, and Sriraam Natarajan (Eds.). AAAI Press,
8716–8723. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V38I8.28717
[31] Yu-An Liu, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Wei Chen, and Xueqi Cheng. 2023. On the
Robustness of Generative Retrieval Models: An Out-of-Distribution Perspective.
CoRR abs/2306.12756 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2306.12756 arXiv:2306.12756
[32] Yu-An Liu, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Changjiang Zhou, Maarten de Rijke,
and Xueqi Cheng. 2024. On the Robustness of Generative Information Retrieval
Models. arXiv:2412.18768 [cs.IR]

[1] Kareem Ahmed, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. 2023. Semantic
Strengthening of Neuro-Symbolic Learning. In Proceedings of The 26th Interna-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, Vol. 206), Francisco Ruiz, Jennifer Dy, and Jan-Willem van de
Meent (Eds.). PMLR, 10252–10261.
html
[2] Arian Askari, Chuan Meng, Mohammad Aliannejadi, Zhaochun Ren, Evan-
gelos Kanoulas, and Suzan Verberne. 2024.
Generative Retrieval with Few-
shot Indexing. CoRR abs/2408.02152 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2408.02152
arXiv:2408.02152
[3] Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu,
Rangan Majumder, Andrew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen, et al. 2016.
Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.09268 (2016).
[4] Michele Bevilacqua, Giuseppe Ottaviano, Patrick Lewis, Scott Yih, Sebastian
Riedel, and Fabio Petroni. 2022. Autoregressive Search Engines: Generating
Substrings as Document Identifiers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35 (2022), 31668–31683.
[5] Patrick Billingsley. 2017. Probability and measure. John Wiley & Sons.
[6] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Ruther-
ford, Katie Millican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bog-
dan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego De Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Ro-
man Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin
Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals, Simon
Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. 2022. Im-
proving Language Models by Retrieving from Trillions of Tokens. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162), Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka,
Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (Eds.). PMLR, 2206–2240.

[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
zato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates,
Inc., 1877–1901.

1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
[8] Sebastian Bruch, Xuanhui Wang, Michael Bendersky, and Marc Najork. 2019. An
Analysis of the Softmax Cross Entropy Loss for Learning-to-Rank with Binary
Relevance. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGIR International Conference on
Theory of Information Retrieval (Santa Clara, CA, USA) (ICTIR ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 75–78. doi:10.1145/3341981.3344221
[9] Nicola De Cao, Gautier Izacard, Sebastian Riedel, and Fabio Petroni. 2021. Autore-
gressive Entity Retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[10] Souradip Chakraborty, Soumya Suvra Ghosal, Ming Yin, Dinesh Manocha,
Mengdi Wang, Amrit Singh Bedi, and Furong Huang. 2024. Transfer Q Star:
Principled Decoding for LLM Alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20495 (2024).
[11] Jiangui Chen, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Maarten de Rijke, Wei Chen, Yixing
Fan, and Xueqi Cheng. 2023. Continual Learning for Generative Retrieval over
Dynamic Corpora. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 306–315. doi:10.1145/3583780.3614821
[12] Jiangui Chen, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Yiqun Liu, Yixing Fan, and Xueqi
Cheng. 2022. CorpusBrain: Pre-train a Generative Retrieval Model for Knowledge-
Intensive Language Tasks. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference
on Information & Knowledge Management, Atlanta, GA, USA, October 17-21, 2022,
Mohammad Al Hasan and Li Xiong (Eds.). ACM, 191–200. doi:10.1145/3511808.
3557271
[13] Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, and Daniel Campos. 2021. Overview
of the TREC 2020 deep learning track. arXiv:2102.07662 [cs.IR]
abs/2102.07662
[14] Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Campos, and Ellen M.
Voorhees. 2020.
Overview of the TREC 2019 deep learning track.
arXiv:2003.07820 [cs.IR]
[15] Imre Csiszár and János Körner. 2011. Information theory: coding theorems for
discrete memoryless systems. Cambridge University Press.
[16] Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. 2023. Precise Zero-Shot
Dense Retrieval without Relevance Labels. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 1762–1777. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.

[33] Sanket Vaibhav Mehta, Jai Gupta, Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q. Tran, Jinfeng
Rao, Marc Najork, Emma Strubell, and Donald Metzler. 2023. DSI++: Updating
Transformer Memory with New Documents. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino,
and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore,
8198–8213. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.510
[34] Donald Metzler, Yi Tay, Dara Bahri, and Marc Najork. 2021. Rethinking search:
making domain experts out of dilettantes. SIGIR Forum 55, 1, Article 13 (July
2021), 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3476415.3476428
[35] Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Kartik Goyal, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. 2022.
Mix and Match: Learning-free Controllable Text Generationusing Energy Lan-
guage Models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Smaranda Muresan, Preslav
Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Dublin, Ireland, 401–415. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.31
[36] Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping
Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, Jilin
Chen, Alex Beutel, and Ahmad Beirami. 2025. Controlled decoding from language
models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
(Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24). JMLR.org, Article 1484, 18 pages.
[37] Waleed Mustafa, Yunwen Lei, Antoine Ledent, and Marius Kloft. 2021. Fine-
grained Generalization Analysis of Structured Output Prediction. In Proceedings
of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21,
Zhi-Hua Zhou (Ed.). International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence
Organization, 2841–2847. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2021/391 Main Track.
[38] Thong Nguyen and Andrew Yates. 2023. Generative Retrieval as Dense Retrieval.
CoRR abs/2306.11397 (2023). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2306.11397 arXiv:2306.11397
[39] Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Ji Ma,
Vincent Zhao, Yi Luan, Keith Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, and Yinfei Yang. 2022. Large
Dual Encoders Are Generalizable Retrievers. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa
Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 9844–9855. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.669
[40] Masaaki Nishino, Kengo Nakamura, and Norihito Yasuda. 2024. Generalization
analysis on learning with a concurrent verifier. In Proceedings of the 36th In-
ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (New Orleans,
LA, USA) (NIPS ’22). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 302,
12 pages.
[41] Masaaki Nishino, Kengo Nakamura, and Norihito Yasuda. 2025. Understanding
the impact of introducing constraints at inference time on generalization error.
In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (Vienna,
Austria) (ICML’24). JMLR.org, Article 1551, 11 pages.
[42] OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
org/abs/2303.08774
[43] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the Limits
of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 21, 140 (2020), 1–67.
[44] Ruiyang Ren, Yingqi Qu, Jing Liu, Xin Zhao, Qifei Wu, Yuchen Ding, Hua Wu,
Haifeng Wang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. A Thorough Examination on Zero-shot
Dense Retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2023, Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 15783–15796. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.
findings-emnlp.1057
[45] E. H. SIMPSON. 1949. Measurement of Diversity. Nature 163, 4148 (April 1949),
688–688. doi:10.1038/163688a0
[46] Weiwei Sun, Lingyong Yan, Zheng Chen, Shuaiqiang Wang, Haichao Zhu,
Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, Dawei Yin, Maarten Rijke, and Zhaochun
Ren. 2023.
Learning to Tokenize for Generative Retrieval. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Glober-
son, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Eds.), Vol. 36. Curran Associates,
Inc., 46345–46361.
91228b942a4528cdae031c1b68b127e8-Paper-Conference.pdf
[47] Yubao Tang, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Jiangui Chen, Zuowei Zhu, Shuaiqiang
Wang, Dawei Yin, and Xueqi Cheng. 2023. Semantic-Enhanced Differentiable
Search Index Inspired by Learning Strategies. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Long Beach, CA,
USA) (KDD ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
4904–4913. doi:10.1145/3580305.3599903
[48] Yubao Tang, Ruqing Zhang, Jiafeng Guo, Maarten de Rijke, Wei Chen, and Xueqi
Cheng. 2024. Generative Retrieval Meets Multi-Graded Relevance. In The Thirty-
eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

openreview.net/forum?id=2xTkeyJFJb
[49] Yi Tay, Vinh Tran, Mostafa Dehghani, Jianmo Ni, Dara Bahri, Harsh Mehta, Zhen
Qin, Kai Hui, Zhe Zhao, Jai Prakash Gupta, Tal Schuster, William W. Cohen, and
Donald Metzler. 2022. Transformer Memory as a Differentiable Search Index.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,

November 28 - December 9, 2022, Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle
Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.).
hash/892840a6123b5ec99ebaab8be1530fba-Abstract-Conference.html
[50] Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Andreas Rücklé, Abhishek Srivastava, and Iryna
Gurevych. 2021. BEIR: A Heterogeneous Benchmark for Zero-shot Evaluation of
Information Retrieval Models. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2).
net/forum?id=wCu6T5xFjeJ
[51] Kexin Wang, Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, and Iryna Gurevych. 2022. GPL:
Generative Pseudo Labeling for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation of Dense
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz
(Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 2345–
2360. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.168
[52] Yujing Wang, Yingyan Hou, Haonan Wang, Ziming Miao, Shibin Wu, Qi
Chen, Yuqing Xia, Chengmin Chi, Guoshuai Zhao, Zheng Liu, Xing Xie,
Hao Sun, Weiwei Deng, Qi Zhang, and Mao Yang. 2022.
A Neural Cor-
pus Indexer for Document Retrieval. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - Decem-
ber 9, 2022, Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave,
K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.).

a46156bd3579c3b268108ea6aca71d13-Abstract-Conference.html
[53] Zihan Wang, Yujia Zhou, Yiteng Tu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2023. NOVO: Learnable
and Interpretable Document Identifiers for Model-Based IR. In Proceedings of
the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment (Birmingham, United Kingdom) (CIKM ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2656–2665. doi:10.1145/3583780.3614993
[54] Ryen W. White and Chirag Shah. 2025. Information Access in the Era of Generative
AI. Springer Cham.
[55] Shiguang Wu, Wenda Wei, Mengqi Zhang, Zhumin Chen, Jun Ma, Zhaochun Ren,
Maarten de Rijke, and Pengjie Ren. 2024. Generative Retrieval as Multi-Vector
Dense Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2024, Washington
DC, USA, July 14-18, 2024, Grace Hui Yang, Hongning Wang, Sam Han, Claudia
Hauff, Guido Zuccon, and Yi Zhang (Eds.). ACM, 1828–1838. doi:10.1145/3626772.
3657697
[56] Shicheng Xu, Liang Pang, Huawei Shen, and Xueqi Cheng. 2023. BERM: Training
the Balanced and Extractable Representation for Matching to Improve General-
ization Ability of Dense Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Anna Rogers,
Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 6620–6635. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.365
[57] Tianchi Yang, Minghui Song, Zihan Zhang, Haizhen Huang, Weiwei Deng, Feng
Sun, and Qi Zhang. 2023. Auto Search Indexer for End-to-End Document Retrieval.
In EMNLP (Findings). Association for Computational Linguistics, 6955–6970.
[58] Weiqin Yang, Jiawei Chen, Xin Xin, Sheng Zhou, Binbin Hu, Yan Feng, Chun
Chen, and Can Wang. 2024.
PSL: Rethinking and Improving Softmax Loss
from Pairwise Perspective for Recommendation. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
forum?id=PhjnK9KWOx
[59] Yue Yu, Chenyan Xiong, Si Sun, Chao Zhang, and Arnold Overwijk. 2022. COCO-
DR: Combating the Distribution Shift in Zero-Shot Dense Retrieval with Con-
trastive and Distributionally Robust Learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Yoav Goldberg,
Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 1462–1479. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-
main.95
[60] Peiwen Yuan, Xinglin Wang, Shaoxiong Feng, Boyuan Pan, Yiwei Li, Heda Wang,
Xupeng Miao, and Kan Li. 2024. Generative Dense Retrieval: Memory Can Be
a Burden. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL 2024 - Volume 1: Long Papers, St.
Julian’s, Malta, March 17-22, 2024, Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver (Eds.).
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2835–2845.
2024.eacl-long.173
[61] Hansi Zeng, Chen Luo, Bowen Jin, Sheikh Muhammad Sarwar, Tianxin Wei, and
Hamed Zamani. 2024. Scalable and Effective Generative Information Retrieval.
In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024, WWW 2024, Singapore, May
13-17, 2024, Tat-Seng Chua, Chong-Wah Ngo, Ravi Kumar, Hady W. Lauw, and
Roy Ka-Wei Lee (Eds.). ACM, 1441–1452. doi:10.1145/3589334.3645477
[62] Hansi Zeng, Chen Luo, and Hamed Zamani. 2024. Planning Ahead in Generative
Retrieval: Guiding Autoregressive Generation through Simultaneous Decoding.
In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2024, Washington DC, USA, July 14-18,
2024, Grace Hui Yang, Hongning Wang, Sam Han, Claudia Hauff, Guido Zuccon,
and Yi Zhang (Eds.). ACM, 469–480. doi:10.1145/3626772.3657746

[63] Honghua Zhang, Meihua Dang, Nanyun Peng, and Guy Van Den Broeck. 2023.
Tractable control for autoregressive language generation. In Proceedings of the
40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA)
(ICML’23). JMLR.org, Article 1716, 14 pages.
[64] Honghua Zhang, Po-Nien Kung, Masahiro Yoshida, Guy Van den Broeck, and
Nanyun Peng. 2024. Adaptable Logical Control for Large Language Models. In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

[65] Hanqing Zhang, Haolin Song, Shaoyu Li, Ming Zhou, and Dawei Song. 2023. A
Survey of Controllable Text Generation Using Transformer-based Pre-trained
Language Models. ACM Comput. Surv. 56, 3, Article 64 (Oct. 2023), 37 pages.
doi:10.1145/3617680
[66] Peitian Zhang, Zheng Liu, Yujia Zhou, Zhicheng Dou, and Zhao Cao. 2023.
Term-Sets Can Be Strong Document Identifiers For Auto-Regressive Search En-
gines. ArXiv abs/2305.13859 (2023).
258841428
[67] Yujia Zhou, Jing Yao, Zhicheng Dou, Ledell Wu, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Dynami-
cRetriever: A Pre-trained Model-based IR System Without an Explicit Index. Mach.

Intell. Res. 20, 2 (April 2023), 276–288.
[68] Han Zhu, Daqing Chang, Ziru Xu, Pengye Zhang, Xiang Li, Jie He, Han Li, Jian
Xu, and Kun Gai. 2019. Joint optimization of tree-based index and deep model for
recommender systems. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA.
[69] Han Zhu, Xiang Li, Pengye Zhang, Guozheng Li, Jie He, Han Li, and Kun Gai.
2018. Learning Tree-based Deep Model for Recommender Systems. In Proceedings
of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery &
Data Mining (London, United Kingdom) (KDD ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1079–1088. doi:10.1145/3219819.3219826
[70] Shengyao Zhuang, Houxing Ren, Linjun Shou, Jian Pei, Ming Gong, Guido Zuc-
con, and Daxin Jiang. 2022. Bridging the Gap Between Indexing and Retrieval
for Differentiable Search Index with Query Generation. ArXiv abs/2206.10128
(2022).
[71] Jingwei Zhuo, Ziru Xu, Wei Dai, Han Zhu, Han Li, Jian Xu, and Kun Gai. 2020.
Learning optimal tree models under beam search. In Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’20). JMLR.org, Article 1080,
10 pages.