A Mosaic of Perspectives: Understanding
Ownership in Software Engineering

Tomi Suomi[0009−0007−9957−3229], Petri Ihantola[0000−0003−1197−7266], Tommi
Mikkonen[0000−0002−8540−9918], and Niko Mäkitalo[0000−0002−7994−3700]

Faculty of Information Technology, University of Jyväskylä, Finland
{tomi.p.suomi, petri.j.ihantola, tommi.j.mikkonen,

arXiv:2505.14220v2 [cs.SE] 2 Jun 2025

Abstract. Agile software development relies on self-organized teams,
underlining the importance of individual responsibility. How developers
take responsibility and build ownership are influenced by external fac-
tors such as architecture and development methods. This paper examines
the existing literature on ownership in software engineering and in psy-
chology, and argues that a more comprehensive view of ownership in
software engineering has a great potential in improving software team’s
work. Initial positions on the issue are offered for discussion and to lay
foundations for further research.

Keywords: ownership · software · collaboration

1
Introduction

Independent and self-organized teams are the cornerstone of agile development.
In addition to personal properties, the way developers take responsibility de-
pends on external factors such as architecture or development methods. As an
example, microservices have become standard practice, leading to more indepen-
dently scalable and flexible software architecture at the cost of overall system
complexity, where large systems have hundreds or even more microservices, often
scattering and obfuscating the lines of ownership [1].
Although software ownership has been touched upon in multiple studies [7],
the overall understanding of the topic is scarce. The previous research focuses on
individual ownership targets, creating various definitions and ways of measuring
ownership. The interplay between working practices, organizational structure,
architecture, ownership, and various quality attributes is complex. For example,
ownership affects various technical quality metrics as well as intangible factors
like teamwork [12] and developer retention [5]. In modern, complex systems,
we should better understand the overarching nature of ownership and how to
manage it.
This paper introduces initial positions on what ownership studies are lacking
and how to fill this gap. Section 2 provides background on ownership research,
both in the software engineering context and briefly in psychology. Next, Section
3 introduces the research gap and provides six positions based on the analysis

2
T. Suomi et al.

of previous research. Finally, Section 4 derives concrete research questions, dis-
cusses potential strategies to answer them, and concludes our work.

2
Background

2.1
Ownership in Software Engineering

Recent systematic literature review by Koana et al. [7] found 28 definitions
for ownership, ranging from code ownership to all the way to organizational
ownership. The study focused heavily on corporeal ownership side, that refers
to development history of an artifact. Moreover, the review divides ownership
into three dimensions: What (e.g., code, task, issue, bug, and requirement), Who
(e.g, developer, organization, and manager), and How (i.e., dedicated or shared).
By using this classification, code was by far the most studied artifact.

Code ownership Bird et al. [4] studied code ownership as the ratio of com-
mits made by developer against all commits in that particular component. The
researchers categorized developers into major and minor contributors, based on
whether their total number of commits were more or less than 5% of total com-
mits, respectively. The study found that high number of minor contributors had
correlation with both pre- and post-release failures of both in Windows Vista
and Windows 7. Also, top contributors higher proportion of ownership also led
to fewer failures, but the correlation was less than when using minor contributors
as the variable.
Rahman and Devanbu [18] on the other hand studied ownership of code at
code line level, so that ownership refers to the developer who has authored most
of the code. The study also considered developer’s specialized (experience in
particular file) and general experience. The results suggested that specialized
experience is more important in writing bug-free code than general experience.
Additionally, faulty code was found to be more likely authored by single devel-
oper, contradicting the study by Bird et al. [4], where higher number of minor
contributors led to more failures. One reason can be the different granularity of
metrics, where one study used line level metrics to determine ownership versus
commit level, underlining the need for more standard approach on measuring
ownership.
Zabarast et al. [25] used Ownership and Contribution Alignment Model
(OCAM) to understand the alignment of ownership with relation to the actual
contributions. Compared to the two previous studies presented above, ticket data
was used in addition to Git data to understand ownership and contributions. The
authors found that misalignment of ownership (i.e. owning team is not the main
contributor to the component) led to faster accumulation of technical debt. The
misalignment can happen for example due to module dependencies, where other
team needs to do changes in dependent module. Similar pattern was also found
by Bird et al. [4], where it was observed that minor contributor was often major
contributor in dependency package. Such issues can happen with microservice
systems for example due to the complex dependencies they might have.

A Mosaic of Perspectives: Understanding Ownership in Software Engineering
3

While the studies of code ownership against faults in code are many, the
correlation between the two metrics is still unclear. Where Bird et al. [4] found
correlation between number of minor contributors and faults, the replication
study by Koana et al. [7] didn’t see similar effect. And while Koana et al. [7]
saw increase in bugs with higher number of major contributors, Rahman and
Devanbu [18] noticed that buggy code was more likely authored by single de-
veloper. In addition there are studies that found no strong correlation between
number of developers and defects, such as the one by Weyuker et al. [22]. The
reasons for these inconsistencies can be many, such as different product types, or
the context of development such as the methodology used. Deeper understanding
of ownership and all of its dimensions should help in eliminating the differences
in results, which is why further research is required.

Psychological ownership Psychological ownership in software engineering
context was defined as a feeling of ownership toward an owned entity in a project
by Koana et al. [7]. In study by Sedano et al. [20], psychological ownership is
related to team code ownership (meaning development approach where anyone
within team can modify any part of team’s code). The authors state that team
code ownership is not simply a decree, but rather a feeling. The feeling of team
code ownership was found to be supported by understanding the system context,
having contributed to the code, perceiving the code quality as high, feeling that
the product satisfies user’s needs and finally high perceived team cohesion. The
study also found multiple risks towards feeling of ownership, such as knowledge
silos, increasing code base and team size, and pressure to deliver.
Psychological ownership has also been studied in context of open-source soft-
ware participant retention by Chung et al. [5]. The authors investigated value
and demands-value fit of developers towards open source projects and found
that both negatively impact developer turnover in open-source projects. How-
ever, higher feelings of psychological ownership were found to moderate the effect
on value fit, meaning even if value fit towards the project was low, high feeling
of psychological ownership improved developer retention.
Collaboration can also benefit from psychological ownership in agile develop-
ment. The study by Nazir et al. [12] investigated both individual and collective
(psychological) ownership and suggests that individual ownership can both pro-
mote and hinder (e.g. by developer siloing themselves or insisting on solving
the issue at hand alone) collective ownership. This aligns well with the discus-
sion on the negative and positive effects of psychological ownership, which are
presented in greater detail in Subsection 2.2. The authors found that collective
ownership was "turbocharger" in collaboration, meaning collective ownership
improved collaboration, which in turn improved collective ownership. The same
study states that collective ownership can develop by high perceived level of
control over tasks, shared understanding of the tasks and involvement in col-
laboration. These are well in line with the routes of psychological ownership
presented in Fig. 1. The authors do note however that collective psychological

4
T. Suomi et al.

Motives
Experiences

Efficacy and effectance

Controlling the target

Coming to intimately know the target
Psychological

Self-identity

Effects

ownership

Having a place

Investing the self into the target

Fig. 1. Motives, experiences and effects of psychological ownership [14].

ownership is not universal concept, and for example organizational culture might
affect the feeling of collective psychological ownership.

Impact of organization Looking at the issue of ownership with even wider
lens, organizational structure, and therefore the ownership, has also been shown
to affect both software failure-proneness as well as test effectiveness and relia-
bility [6, 11]. Herzig and Nagappan [6] studied test effectiveness and reliability,
finding that larger organizational subgroups with short communication paths
(i.e. test owners are closer to each other in organizational chart) positively cor-
relates with test effectiveness. The study therefore supports the idea that test
suites should be owned by individual organizational subgroups. The authors also
noted that test suites owned by engineers that have already left the company
are less effective.

2.2
Ownership in Psychology

Ownership has been studied vastly in other fields as well, which might provide
interesting insights on how to understand ownership in software engineering
context. Especially interesting are the ownership studies in psychology, where
psychological ownership is presented in better detail. Psychological ownership
is a feeling of ownership towards a target, or "a cognitive–affective state that
characterizes the human condition", held primarily by the individual of this
feeling [15].
Fig. 1 represents the motives and experiences that cause psychological owner-
ship as well as consequences resulting from psychological ownership. On the first
column of Fig. 1 we have motives, or roots, of psychological ownership that fulfill
basic human motives [15]. The first motive efficacy and effectance, meaning as
we interact with target, some change happens, leading to feeling of efficacy [24].
The second motive is self-identity, referring how objects for example can form
and express both private and public identity of a person [23]. Finally, the third
motive is having a place, for example home, which can provide stable refuge,
providing security, simulation and identity for the person [16]. Having a place
has also been described as "belongingness" [3].
On the second column of Fig. 1 the major experiences, or routes, from which
psychological ownership is born [14] are presented. First there is controlling the
target. One way to promote the feeling of control in organizations can be self-
managing teams and employee’s participation in decision making [8]. Secondly,

A Mosaic of Perspectives: Understanding Ownership in Software Engineering
5

we have intimately knowing the target. Supporting this, Sedano et al. [20] found
that developers in the study felt more ownership towards code when system
context was well known to them. Final experience to psychological ownership
is investing self into the target. One example is IKEA effect where consumers
value products more when they have assembled it themselves [13,19].
The last column of Fig. 1 simply represents any potential consequences due
to psychological ownership. These can be positive or negative. For example,
psychological ownership can lead to higher job satisfaction, commitment and
intention to stay within the job [3]. On the negative side, person might refuse to
share information or resist change [14].

3
Gap in Research

Based on the related work above, there is little doubt about the importance and
industrial impact of ownership. From code quality to test efficiency to techni-
cal debt accumulation, understanding ownership can allow companies to exploit
this phenomenon. From the psychological ownership side, the increased feeling of
responsibility, developer retention, and improved collaboration were just few of
the many potential effects. The various known and yet to be discovered benefits
of understanding ownership combined with the knowledge of how to foster own-
ership in practice show promise of significant industry impact. Once completed,
the results provide practitioners both the theoretical understanding of ownership
as well as how it can be embedded into the existing development processes.
Position 1: Ownership research in software engineering has been
scattered, lacking full understanding. In his paper introducing the chaos
model methodology, Raccoon stated that, "It seems to me that we have studied
each aspect of software development in isolation, not how all aspects fit together."
[17]. The same appears to be true also for ownership in software engineering:
while individual aspects of ownership have been studied, there is no complete
model for ownership available that explains how the various pieces work together.
Position 2: Psychological ownership can help understand owner-
ship in software engineering more comprehensively. For example, we can
consider corporeal ownership and psychological ownership. Corporeal ownership
was based on the history of an artifact. But looking at the routes of psychological
ownership in Fig. 1, it seems unlikely that corporeal ownership exists without
psychological ownership. In fact, one paper argued that team code ownership is
a feeling [20], meaning it’s related to psychological ownership. Similarly, it could
be argued that corporeal ownership is, in fact, psychological ownership. Scenario
where developer has created large part of a system but doesn’t feel psychological
ownership towards it seems hard to imagine.
Position 3: Architectural and methodology choices affect the de-
velopment and distribution of ownership. Continuing on the psychological
ownership path, the current assembly line way of software development might
have made it more difficult to develop a feeling of psychological ownership to-
wards the entire project. Just like in Ford manufacturing, workers no longer

6
T. Suomi et al.

worked on every part of the car, instead they would focus on one or two tasks on
an assembly line, which made the work more boring [2] and could arguably have
led to loss of feeling of psychological ownership beyond their immediate tasks. It
could be argued that software engineering has seen a similar shift towards "as-
sembly line" as well in terms of agile development, where work is iterative and
focuses on smaller steps. Similarly microservices architecture breaks the bigger
system into smaller unit, affecting the way ownership develops.
Position 4: Time dimension must also be considered in ownership
studies and ownership must be transferable. While the systematic lit-
erature review on ownership in software teams did divide the ownership into
components of what, who and how [7], the time component must also be consid-
ered. Software engineering teams are dynamic, with people coming and going.
Therefore, the ownership model should also be dynamic enough that it doesn’t
rely on any individual, and even someone with high level of ownership leaving
should be manageable without causing unnecessary strain on the development,
meaning the ownership must be transferable.
Position 5: To study ownership, we must understand what belongs
to software engineers’ responsibilities to identify all possible routes to
ownership. When talking of overarching ownership strategy, it’s also important
to consider all responsibilities software engineers have. Ayas et al. [10] studied
the roles, responsibilities, and skills of engineers in microservice era based on
job-ads. The authors identified 5 families of responsibilities: software develop-
ment support & infrastructure, software product delivery, software process &
team development, professional services delivery and software engineering gov-
ernance. The implication for ownership study is that there is more to a software
engineer’s job than simply coding, and ownership studies should not ignore these
other responsibilities and how they might affect or be affected by a feeling of
psychological ownership. In fact, up to 52% of developer’s workday is used in
non-development-heavy activities [9].
Position 6: Ownership must be integrated as part of the software
development process. Once understood more comprehensively, ownership can
be used in practice.

4
A Research Agenda

Inspired by the importance of commitment and self-organization of teams in
agile software development, this paper presented the current work done on own-
ership in software engineering and mirrored research in psychology to software
engineering. While in agile methodologies smaller teams can be self-organized,
cross-team communication can be challenging in large-scale projects. Although
large-scale agile methodologies try to tackle this challenge, we believe ownership
can provide interesting pathway to improve agile software development meth-
ods at a large scale. It was argued that the ownership research so far has been
scattered with no overall understanding of the issue. To guide research further,
below are presented research questions to bridge the research gaps discussed.

A Mosaic of Perspectives: Understanding Ownership in Software Engineering
7

Based on the position statements above, the following overarching research
challenge can be summarized:
How can we embed ownership into software engineering process?
To decompose this challenge, the following research questions (RQ) are proposed:
RQ1: What is ownership and what does it contain? To understand
the targets and dimensions of ownership, existing literature must be studied in
combination with interviews and surveys with software engineering professionals.
RQ2: How can we measure and influence ownership to understand
its benefits? To measure and influence ownership, various instruments are
needed to create standard ways to measure and affect ownership. The existing
literature on ownership on software engineering can be compared against known
methods of psychological ownership. Also the interviews and surveys from RQ1
can be utilized here.
RQ3: How software development context affects ownership in soft-
ware teams? As software is developed in various contexts (e.g. different method-
ologies and architectures), their effect on ownership must be understood. The
learnings from RQ1 and RQ2 should be studied in practice to understand the
fostering of a sense of ownership. Trialing the methods with different contexts
(e.g. team using monolith architecture and another team using microservice ar-
chitecture), nuances of team context can be studied.
The proposed research approach needs action research [21], where practition-
ers are involved directly in the research. The results will then contribute to the
body of knowledge by providing practical solutions to understand and benefit
from ownership.

References

1. Introducing Domain-Oriented Microservice Architecture.
en-IN/blog/microservice-architecture/, accessed: September 4, 2024
2. The
Moving
Assembly
Line.

moving-assembly-line.html, accessed: November 14, 2024
3. Avey, J.B., Avolio, B.J., Crossley, C.D., Luthans, F.: Psychological ownership: The-
oretical extensions, measurement and relation to work outcomes. J. of Organiza-
tional Behavior: The International J. of Industrial, Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology and Behavior 30(2), 173–191 (2009)
4. Bird, C., Nagappan, N., Murphy, B., Gall, H., Devanbu, P.: Don’t touch my code!
examining the effects of ownership on software quality. In: Proceedings of the 19th
ACM SIGSOFT symposium and the 13th European conference on Foundations of
software engineering. pp. 4–14 (2011)
5. Chung, T.R., Sharma, P.N., Daniel, S.L.: The impact of person-organization fit and
psychological ownership on turnover in open source software projects. In: AMCIS
(2015)
6. Herzig, K., Nagappan, N.: The impact of test ownership and team structure on
the reliability and effectiveness of quality test runs. In: Proceedings of the 8th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement. pp. 1–10 (2014)

8
T. Suomi et al.

7. Koana, U.A., Le, Q.H., Raman, S., Carlson, C., Chew, F., Nayebi, M.: Examining
ownership models in software teams. Empirical Software Engineering 29(6), 1–43
(2024)
8. Liu, J., Wang, H., Hui, C., Lee, C.: Psychological ownership: How having control
matters. J. of Management Studies 49(5), 869–895 (2012)
9. Meyer, A.N., Barr, E.T., Bird, C., Zimmermann, T.: Today was a good day: The
daily life of software developers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47(5),
863–880 (2019)
10. Michael Ayas, H., Hebig, R., Leitner, P.: The roles, responsibilities, and skills of en-
gineers in the era of microservices-based architectures. In: Proceedings of the 2024
IEEE/ACM 17th International Conference on Cooperative and Human Aspects of
Software Engineering. pp. 13–23 (2024)
11. Nagappan, N., Murphy, B., Basili, V.: The influence of organizational structure on
software quality: an empirical case study. In: Proceedings of the 30th international
conference on Software engineering. pp. 521–530 (2008)
12. Nazir, S., Collignon, S.E., Surendra, N.C.: Understanding collective ownership in
agile development: Turbo charging the process. Information & Management 61(6),
104004 (2024)
13. Norton, M.I., Mochon, D., Ariely, D.: The ikea effect: When labor leads to love. J.
of consumer psychology 22(3), 453–460 (2012)
14. Pierce, J.L., Kostova, T., Dirks, K.T.: Toward a theory of psychological ownership
in organizations. Academy of management review 26(2), 298–310 (2001)
15. Pierce, J.L., Kostova, T., Dirks, K.T.: The state of psychological ownership: Inte-
grating and extending a century of research. Review of general psychology 7(1),
84–107 (2003)
16. Porteous, J.D.: Home: The territorial core. Geographical review pp. 383–390 (1976)
17. Raccoon, L.: The chaos model and the chaos cycle. ACM SIGSOFT Software En-
gineering Notes 20(1), 55–66 (1995)
18. Rahman, F., Devanbu, P.: Ownership, experience and defects: a fine-grained study
of authorship. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software
Engineering. pp. 491–500 (2011)
19. Sarstedt, M., Neubert, D., Barth, K., et al.: The ikea effect. a conceptual replica-
tion. J. of Marketing Behavior 2(4), 307–312 (2017)
20. Sedano, T., Ralph, P., Péraire, C.: Practice and perception of team code ownership.
In: Proceedings of the 20th international conference on evaluation and assessment
in software engineering. pp. 1–6 (2016)
21. Staron, M.: Action research in software engineering. Springer (2020)
22. Weyuker, E.J., Ostrand, T.J., Bell, R.M.: Do too many cooks spoil the broth? using
the number of developers to enhance defect prediction models. Empirical Software
Engineering 13, 539–559 (2008)
23. Wheeler, S.C., Bechler, C.J.: Objects and self-identity. Current Opinion in Psy-
chology 39, 6–11 (2021)
24. White, R.W.: Motivation reconsidered: the concept of competence. Psychological
review 66(5), 297 (1959)
25. Zabardast, E., Gonzalez-Huerta, J., Tanveer, B.: Ownership vs contribution: Inves-
tigating the alignment between ownership and contribution. In: 2022 IEEE 19th
International Conference on Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C). pp. 30–
34. IEEE (2022)