Shots and Boosters: Exploring the Use of Combined Prebunking Interventions to
Raise Critical Thinking and Create Long-Term Protection Against
Misinformation

HUIYUN TANG, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
ANASTASIA SERGEEVA, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg

The problem of how to effectively mitigate the flow of misinformation remains a significant challenge. The classical approach to this is

arXiv:2505.07486v1 [cs.HC] 12 May 2025

public disapproval of claims or "debunking". The approach is still widely used on social media, but it has some severe limitations in terms

of applicability and efficiency. An alternative strategy is to enhance individuals’ critical thinking through educational interventions.

Instead of merely disproving misinformation, these approaches aim to strengthen users’ reasoning skills, enabling them to evaluate

and reject false information independently. In this position paper, we explore a combination of intervention methods designed to

improve critical thinking in the context of online media consumption. We highlight the role of AI in supporting different stages of

these interventions and present a design concept that integrates AI-driven strategies to foster critical reasoning and media literacy.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Miinformation, Prebuking, Design Concept, Nudges, Media Literacy

1
INTRODUCTION

The fast spread of misinformation is an enormous challenge for both society and individuals, with a great impact on

democracy [15]. In light of the grave consequences, various digital misinformation interventions have been implemented

to slow its propagation. The most common way to combat misinformation is fact-checking. Traditionally, fact-checking

was performed by journalists [16], initially as part of the internal validation process (meaning that if the information

in the paper was not correct, the paper would never be published), and later externally, for the broader audience

through fact-checking websites [16] and collaborations with social networks [31]. Another form of fact-checking

is the crowdsourcing model. Mostly known for its implementation on X as "Community Notes", the crowdsourcing

model relies on ordinary users who provide their insights on the veracity of information [5]. Finally, to achieve

better scalability and coverage of social networks, there is a growing number of studies dedicated to the use of AI

optimisation, both in the fact-checking/identifying questionable content [17] and in informing users about the results of

this assessment[20, 27, 33]. These interventions can be broadly assigned to the "debunking" type of interventions[10]. The

goal of debunking interventions is to inform the user that the content they are reading contains incorrect information,

sometimes explaining exactly what is wrong.

Some limitations have been reported on the effectiveness of the debunking approach. A primary concern is a limited

scope: only a fraction of misinformation undergoes verification[11]. Crowdsourcing and AI-driven approaches can

alleviate these problems by expanding the scale of fact-checking; however, misinformation usually spreads very quickly,

which creates a significant time gap between initial spread and debunking, affecting its effectiveness [6]. In addition,

exposure to misinformation has lasting effects, making it challenging to mitigate it by debunking[29]. Given these

challenges, relying only on debunking is not enough. We also need to improve people’s critical thinking skills and help

them resist misinformation more effectively.

This paper was presented at the 2025 ACM Workshop on Human-AI Interaction for Augmented Reasoning (AIREASONING-2025-01). This is the authors’
version for arXiv.

Authors’ addresses: Huiyun Tang, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, Anastasia Sergeeva, University of
Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg,

1

2
Tang et al.

Currently, there are two main approaches aimed at raising people’s critical thinking and improving their skills in

identifying misinformation: nudging and inoculation. Nudging involves subtle design interventions designed to trigger

analytical thinking, urging users to engage their critical thinking skills[25]. For example, introducing friction, such as

asking people to pause before sharing information, activates their existing ability to critically evaluate content[13].

However, nudging alone does not directly correct existing misconceptions or improve people’s skills; instead, it focuses

on prompting them to use their existing abilities. This approach works only if the person already has all the necessary

knowledge to recognize misinformation but just needs to be put in the right state of mind to apply it.

On the other hand, inoculation is an educational approach that aims to enhance or build analytical skills and

media literacy. This approach is based on inoculation theory [7], which suggests that exposing people to weaker

forms of misinformation can help them develop mental resistance to stronger misinformation in the future[38]. The

approach includes different educational interventions, such as educational articles, videos and games[8, 36]. Although

those methods have shown promise, their effectiveness often diminishes without regular reinforcement. Recent

advancements in AI present new opportunities to address these challenges and improve the inoculation approach. AI-

driven educational tools can deliver personalized learning experiences tailored to individual users’ needs, offer immediate

and detailed feedback, and facilitate interactive experience that actively engage learners[28]. Several successful examples

demonstrate the effectiveness of rapid interactions with AI agents in improving cognitive thinking, leading to immediate

results[9, 30, 41]. At the same time, media literacy interventions and serious games (including games with AI-based

elements) have been shown to be effective in improving long-term critical thinking skills, particularly in the context of

media literacy [37, 39, 40].

Researchers suggested that a single intervention may have only limited effects[25]. In this position paper, we suggest

that nudging and inoculation should be understood as complementary rather than interchangeable strategies. While

nudging taps into immediate, short-term cognitive resources, inoculation contributes to deeper, longer-term growth in

critical thinking and media literacy. To support this idea, we first reviewed current tools for fostering critical thinking,

especially focusing on the context of media literacy. Then, we propose a design concept that aims to improve the literacy

of an individual in the media.

2
RELATED WORK

2.1
Critical Thinking and Digital and Media Literacy

Critical thinking lacks a universally accepted definition [19]. Following HCI literature[41], this paper defines critical

thinking as the ability to “evaluate arguments or propositions and make judgments that inform beliefs and guide

actions([21]p. 1).” In the context of online media consumption, critical thinking skills are closely related to digital literacy

and media literacy. Digital literacy, a narrower aspect of information literacy, emphasizes the competencies in using

digital tools and discerning credible sources[3]. Media literacy focuses specifically on equipping users to detect biases

and underlying messages, defined as the ability to “access, analyse, and produce information for specific outcomes” ([2],

p. 6).

2.2
Developing and Supporting Critical Thinking in HCI

HCI research has explored various methods to support and enhance critical thinking. For clarity, we categorize these

methods into two groups based on their intended duration of impact: short-term effects and medium-to-long-term

effects.

Shots and Boosters: Exploring the Use of Combined Prebunking Interventions to Raise Critical Thinking and Create
Long-Term Protection Against Misinformation
3

2.2.1
Short-term Effects interventions. AI-powered tools and LLM have been extensively explored to foster critical

thinking, particularly through simulated debates, personalized feedback, and adaptive interactions. For example,

Tanprasert et al. developed an LLM-based chatbot capable of adopting distinct debating personas: "persuasive" (rational,

understanding) and "eristic" (aggressive, confrontational) to encourage users to critically evaluate content encountered

within YouTube’s filter bubbles. Their results indicated that the persuasive chatbot was particularly effective in provoking

deeper reflection on arguments[41]. Similarly, Danry et al. employed an AI-based questioning framework inspired by

the Socratic method, using targeted questions to stimulate critical reasoning and logical evaluation. Their findings

showed significant improvements in the analytical engagement and logical discernment of users[9]. Further research

has explored the use of multiple LLM-based agents to debate opposing points of view, thus fostering divergent reasoning

and encouraging users to critically reflect on alternative points of view[30].

Another related approach involves real-time assessment and explanatory feedback to encourage analytical thinking

when users interact with news content. Zavolokina et al. proposed an AI-driven digital nudging tool designed to shift

users from intuitive, rapid thinking (System 1) to more deliberate, analytical thinking (System 2). Their intervention

provided real-time propaganda detection along with AI-generated explanations, effectively slowing impulsive news

consumption and improving users’ ability to critically assess media content[42].

2.2.2
Medium-to-long-term Effects Interventions. The second group of interventions include the various educational

interventions (mostly in the context of media literacy education), aimed at raising people’s awareness of misinformation

and deepening their understanding of it. We identified two areas where AI can be useful for improving the education

process: personalized AI-based learning courses and serious games with AI components.

Jian [23] specifies four areas where AI can be used in the educational process: data analysis of student interactions,

AI-powered virtual assistants for virtual tutoring, AI-based adaptive assessment (tailored for the students’ needs) and

adaptive resource recommender systems. In the context of developing critical thinking skills, AI-based characters can

take the role of co-learners or tutors to lead user progression through learning materials [35], fostering reflection and

making the process of acquiring knowledge more enjoyable. Similarly, [4] showed that despite some difficulties in

generating tailored content via AI, it is a prospective method for future educational intervention development. In the

domain of Media Studies, Parra-Valencia and Massey [34] pointed to the benefits of using AI agents to enhance digital

literacy (which is often considered in relation to media literacy) and to promote access to information and resources,

which, in turn, could help create a knowledge base, which is a core component of critical thinking processes [26].

One of the potential ways to incorporate the AI components into a tailored intervention can be done via a serious

games approach. It has a long story in the misinformation education domain with a goal to improve information

literacy (e.g. [37]) via interactive and immersive/role-playing experiences. For instance, in games like Bad News [37],

Harmony Square [1], Cat Park [18], and ChamberBreaker [22], players assume the role of misinformation creators,

learning firsthand about deceptive tactics. Conversely, games such as MathE [24]and Escape the Fake [32] position

players as detective-debunker, identifying fake news using verification tools such as reverse image search. In terms of

AI, there was an attempt to develop a role-playing game where players acted as fact-checkers, reviewing storylines

generated by LLMS. The results showed that the game enabled players to critically engage in misinformation through

investigative role-play [39]. Similarly, Tang et al. created a misinformation game where two players compete to sway

the AI-represented public opinion by either creating or debunking misinformation; the results showed the efficiency of

this intervention in improving users’ misinformation discrimination abilities and will to use critical thinking while

interacting with media[40].

4
Tang et al.

Summarizing the existing literature, we can conclude that, while there are several attempts to apply AI at the different

levels of prebunking interventions, the attempts are still limited and do not combine the benefits of short- and long-term

interventions.

Fig. 1. Presentation of Design concept

3
DESIGN CONCEPT

Our proposed AI-driven intervention is designed as an interactive training game structured into two complementary

stages, combining elements of inoculation theory and nudging. The training leverages AI’s capacity for personalized

interactions to enhance critical thinking and media literacy.

Shots and Boosters: Exploring the Use of Combined Prebunking Interventions to Raise Critical Thinking and Create
Long-Term Protection Against Misinformation
5

Fig. 2. Presentation of Design concept

3.1
Stage 1: Inoculation Training ("Vaccination")

In the first stage, users participate in a simulated "vaccination" experience against misinformation through an interactive

game. Players encounter various potentially misleading posts or news articles and must determine whether each is

genuine information or not. The player also needs to write their reasoning in conversation with an AI agent, aiming

to persuade the agent of their judgment. The AI agent acts as an intelligent tutor (it is also possible to implement

multiple agents, who will take the roles of additional non-playable characters (NPC), helping users gather additional

information). The AI agent evaluates the quality of the user’s justification and arguments, guided by criteria drawn

from professional journalistic practices [12]. Then, the agent provides an analysis of the user’s arguments and corrects

6
Tang et al.

misconceptions. In case of low critical thinking and media literacy skills, the agent can provide a link to additional

educational resources, which explains the basics of reasoning and information gathering; it can also show the example

of a reasoning path, which can be applied to the gaming task (similarly to the rubric analysis of the Collegiate Learning

Assessment Test [14] ) Lastly, the agent can provide structural feedback for the user, including a summary or categorize

the user’s reasoning strategies, helping players become aware of their strengths and potential biases (see the proposed

design concept in (Figure 1).

Through repeated interaction with the player, the AI agent learns the player’s reasoning style, strengths, and

weaknesses. This information will help the agent successfully teach the user, customize exercises, and adjust the

difficulty level of the game. Additionally, the agent saves the user’s strength and weakness profile for future "boosters"

interventions. After achieving sufficient mastery (as indicated by consistent performance), the users move on to the

second stage.

3.2
Stage 2: Reinforcement Nudges ("Booster")

The second stage involves brief, personalized reinforcement Unlike previous stages, which involved extensive interac-

tions with agents, this phase uses concise and targeted nudges delivered by the AI agent to remind users of previously

learned strategies or correct any emerging misconceptions.

The main idea of this stage is to help users apply their new skills in everyday fact-checking situations. Therefore, the

system should have the opportunity to incorporate examples from daily news or (based on the user’s choice) the user’s

social media news feed and prompt the user to perform critical thinking exercises on this information in the form of

short nudge-based exercises.

These nudges are dynamically generated and rooted in the AI agent’s knowledge of each user’s prior interactions.

For example, if a user previously repeatedly made mistakes via trusting the source, which used authority claims (e.g.

pretending to be medical authority) a follow-up nudge might remind them: "Check the credibility and expertise of the

authority figures cited in this article." This brief and personalized reinforcement aims to retain the learned strategies over

the longer term, maintaining cognitive immunity against misinformation with minimal cognitive load (See proposed

design concept in (Figure 2)).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research was supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund (REMEDIS, REgulatory and other solutions to

MitigatE online DISinformation (INTER/FNRS/21/16554939)).

REFERENCES

[1] 2020. Harmony Square: A Political Disinformation Game. Accessed: 2024-09-09.
[2] Patricia Aufderheide. 2018. Media literacy: From a report of the national leadership conference on media literacy. In Media Literacy Around the
World. Routledge, 79–86.
[3] David Bawden et al. 2008. Origins and concepts of digital literacy. Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices 30, 2008 (2008), 17–32.
[4] Mohammad Hassan Yousif Binhammad, Azzam Othman, Laila Abuljadayel, Huda Al Mheiri, Muna Alkaabi, and Mohammad Almarri. 2024.
Investigating how generative AI can create personalized learning materials tailored to individual student needs. Creative Education 15, 7 (2024),
1499–1523.
[5] Yuwei Chuai, Anastasia Sergeeva, Gabriele Lenzini, and Nicolas Pröllochs. 2024. Community Fact-Checks Trigger Moral Outrage in Replies to
Misleading Posts on Social Media. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08829 (2024).
[6] Yuwei Chuai, Haoye Tian, Nicolas Pröllochs, and Gabriele Lenzini. 2024. Did the Roll-Out of Community Notes Reduce Engagement With
Misinformation on X/Twitter? Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, CSCW2 (2024), 1–52.

Shots and Boosters: Exploring the Use of Combined Prebunking Interventions to Raise Critical Thinking and Create
Long-Term Protection Against Misinformation
7

[7] Josh Compton, Sander van der Linden, John Cook, and Melisa Basol. 2021. Inoculation theory in the post-truth era: Extant findings and new
frontiers for contested science, misinformation, and conspiracy theories. Social and Personality Psychology Compass 15, 6 (2021), e12602.
[8] Theodora Dame Adjin-Tettey. 2022. Combating fake news, disinformation, and misinformation: Experimental evidence for media literacy education.
Cogent arts & humanities 9, 1 (2022), 2037229.
[9] Valdemar Danry, Pat Pataranutaporn, Yaoli Mao, and Pattie Maes. 2023. Don’t just tell me, ask me: Ai systems that intelligently frame explanations
as questions improve human logical discernment accuracy over causal ai explanations. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–13.
[10] Ullrich KH Ecker, Stephan Lewandowsky, John Cook, Philipp Schmid, Lisa K Fazio, Nadia Brashier, Panayiota Kendeou, Emily K Vraga, and
Michelle A Amazeen. 2022. The psychological drivers of misinformation belief and its resistance to correction. Nature Reviews Psychology 1, 1
(2022), 13–29.
[11] Ziv Epstein, Gordon Pennycook, and David Rand. 2020. Will the crowd game the algorithm? Using layperson judgments to combat misinformation
on social media by downranking distrusted sources. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–11.
[12] European Commission. 2025. The Code of Conduct on Disinformation.
Accessed: 2025-04-18.
[13] Lisa Fazio. 2020. Pausing to consider why a headline is true or false can help reduce the sharing of false news. Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation
Review 1, 2 (2020).
[14] Council for Aid to Education. 2014. CLA+: Technical FAQ. New York, NY: Author.
[15] Melanie Freeze, Mary Baumgartner, Peter Bruno, Jacob R Gunderson, Joshua Olin, Morgan Quinn Ross, and Justine Szafran. 2021. Fake claims of
fake news: Political misinformation, warnings, and the tainted truth effect. Political behavior 43 (2021), 1433–1465.
[16] Lucas Graves and Michelle Amazeen. 2019. Fact-checking as idea and practice in journalism. (2019).
[17] Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics 10 (2022), 178–206.
[18] Gusmanson.nl. 2022. Cat Park is a game about disinformation. join the opposition to the cat park!
[19] Donald Hatcher and Kevin Possin. [n. d.]. Thinking Critically about Critical-Thinking Assessment. ([n. d.]).
[20] Benjamin D Horne, Dorit Nevo, John O’Donovan, Jin-Hee Cho, and Sibel Adalı. 2019. Rating reliability and bias in news articles: Does AI assistance
help everyone?. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, Vol. 13. 247–256.
[21] William Huitt. 1998. Critical thinking: An overview. Educational Psychology Interactive. Valdosta, GA: Valdosta State University (1998).
[22] Youngseung Jeon, Bogoan Kim, Aiping Xiong, Dongwon Lee, and Kyungsik Han. 2021. Chamberbreaker: Mitigating the echo chamber effect and
supporting information hygiene through a gamified inoculation system. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (2021),
1–26.
[23] Maher Joe Khan Omar Jian. 2023. Personalized learning through AI. Advances in Engineering Innovation 5 (2023), 16–19.
[24] Anastasia Katsaounidou, Lazaros Vrysis, Rigas Kotsakis, Charalampos Dimoulas, and Andreas Veglis. 2019. MAthE the game: A serious game for
education and training in news verification. Education Sciences 9, 2 (2019), 155.
[25] Anastasia Kozyreva, Philipp Lorenz-Spreen, Stefan M Herzog, Ullrich KH Ecker, Stephan Lewandowsky, Ralph Hertwig, Ayesha Ali, Joe Bak-
Coleman, Sarit Barzilai, Melisa Basol, et al. 2024. Toolbox of individual-level interventions against online misinformation. Nature Human Behaviour
8, 6 (2024), 1044–1052.
[26] Emily R Lai. 2011. Critical thinking: A literature review. Pearson’s Research Reports 6, 1 (2011), 40–41.
[27] Vivian Lai and Chenhao Tan. 2019. On human predictions with explanations and predictions of machine learning models: A case study on deception
detection. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency. 29–38.
[28] Joanne Leong, Pat Pataranutaporn, Valdemar Danry, Florian Perteneder, Yaoli Mao, and Pattie Maes. 2024. Putting things into context: Generative
AI-enabled context personalization for vocabulary learning improves learning motivation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.
[29] Stephan Lewandowsky, Ullrich KH Ecker, Colleen M Seifert, Norbert Schwarz, and John Cook. 2012. Misinformation and its correction: Continued
influence and successful debiasing. Psychological science in the public interest 13, 3 (2012), 106–131.
[30] Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2023. Encouraging divergent
thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19118 (2023).
[31] Nicholas Micallef, Vivienne Armacost, Nasir Memon, and Sameer Patil. 2022. True or false: Studying the work practices of professional fact-checkers.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW1 (2022), 1–44.
[32] Irina Paraschivoiu, Josef Buchner, Robert Praxmarer, and Thomas Layer-Wagner. 2021. Escape the fake: Development and evaluation of an
augmented reality escape room game for fighting fake news. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in
Play. 320–325.
[33] Saumya Pareek, Niels van Berkel, Eduardo Velloso, and Jorge Goncalves. 2024. Effect of Explanation Conceptualisations on Trust in AI-assisted
Credibility Assessment. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction CSCW (2024).
[34] Jorge-Andrick Parra-Valencia and Martha-Lizette Massey. 2023. Leveraging AI Tools for Enhanced Digital Literacy, Access to Information, and
Personalized Learning. In Managing Complex Tasks with Systems Thinking. Springer, 213–234.

8
Tang et al.

[35] Pat Pataranutaporn, Valdemar Danry, Joanne Leong, Parinya Punpongsanon, Dan Novy, Pattie Maes, and Misha Sra. 2021. AI-generated characters
for supporting personalized learning and well-being. Nature Machine Intelligence 3, 12 (2021), 1013–1022.
[36] Jon Roozenbeek and Sander Van der Linden. 2019. Fake news game confers psychological resistance against online misinformation. Palgrave
Communications 5, 1 (2019), 1–10.
[37] Jon Roozenbeek and Sander Van der Linden. 2019. Fake news game confers psychological resistance against online misinformation. Palgrave
Communications 5, 1 (2019), 1–10.
[38] Neeraj Soni. 2024. ‘Prebunking’: An Effective Approach to Combat Misinformation. CyberPeace.
prebunking-an-effective-approach-to-combat-misinformation
[39] Haoheng Tang and Mrinalini Singha. 2024. A Mystery for You: A fact-checking game enhanced by large language models (LLMs) and a tangible
interface. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–5.
[40] Huiyun Tang, Songqi Sun, Kexin Nie, Ang Li, Anastasia Sergeeva, and Ray LC. 2025. Breaking the News: A LLM-based Game where Players Act as
Influencer or Debunker for Raising Awareness About Misinformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04931 (2025).
[41] Thitaree Tanprasert, Sidney S Fels, Luanne Sinnamon, and Dongwook Yoon. 2024. Debate chatbots to facilitate critical thinking on youtube: Social
identity and conversational style make a difference. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–24.
[42] Liudmila Zavolokina, Kilian Sprenkamp, Zoya Katashinskaya, Daniel Gordon Jones, and Gerhard Schwabe. 2024. Think fast, think slow, think
critical: designing an automated propaganda detection tool. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–24.