Mapping Neural Signals to Agent Performance, A Step Towards
Reinforcement Learning from Neural Feedback

Benson Jiang
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

Matthew Russell
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

Julia Santaniello
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

arXiv:2506.12636v1 [cs.LG] 14 Jun 2025

Jivko Sinapov
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

Robert Jacob
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

Donatello Sassaroli
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155

Abstract

Implicit Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning (HITL-RL) is a methodology that integrates passive human feed-
back into autonomous agent training while minimizing human workload. However, existing methods often rely on ac-
tive instruction, requiring participants to teach an agent through unnatural expression or gesture. We introduce NEURO-
LOOP, an implicit feedback framework that utilizes the intrinsic human reward system to drive human-agent interaction.
This work demonstrates the feasibility of a critical first step in the NEURO-LOOP framework: mapping brain signals to
agent performance. Using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), we design a dataset to enable future research
using passive Brain-Computer Interfaces for HITL-RL. Participants are instructed to observe or guide a reinforcement
learning agent in its environment while signals from the prefrontal cortex are collected. We conclude that a relationship
between fNIRS data and agent performance exists using classical machine learning techniques. Finally, we highlight the
potential that neural interfaces may offer to future applications of human-agent interaction, assistive AI, and adaptive
autonomous systems.

Keywords:
Aritficial Intelligence, Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learn-
ing, Neuroimaging

Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the members of the MuLIP and HCI labs for their support, specifically Kenny Zheng,
Anes Kim, Anna Sheaffer, Brennan Miller-Klugman, and Iris Yang.

Recent advancements in human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning (HITL-RL) have become crucial to training and fine-
tuning state-of-the-art systems [11, 6]. However, these feedback methods often require active, focused participation or
expert demonstration for more complex tasks [7].

Implicit human feedback systems present a valuable avenue for cir-
cumventing these limitations. Current methods leverage facial expres-
sion or gesture classification, allowing enhanced agent training while
reducing cost to the human teacher [2, 4]. Occasionally, these experi-
mental procedures are partially explicit, requesting participants to ac-
tively teach the agent through their reactions. Finally, these models
rely on data that can be difficult to access, collect or distribute, creat-
ing technical barriers for research.

Passive Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) offer a unique interface for
HITL-RL frameworks while circumventing some of these limitations.
Human neural feedback can be both fully implicit and easily dis-
tributed. Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) provides a
useful brain signal, a measurement of hemodynamic response in the
prefrontal cortex (PFC). Previous work has found existing relation-
ships between hemodynamic response and cognitive or mental work-
load [5, 10]. The intrinsic “reward function” inherent in the human
dopaminergic system has led to past work that suggests a correlation
between major game-play events and fNIRS neural data [3, 8, 9]. Other
studies have researched a similar framework by utilizing binary error-
related potentials (ErrP) to enhance agent training [12, 1].

Figure 1: NEURO-LOOP Diagram

We hypothesize that an adjacent relationship exists between the human hemodynamic response and agent performance.
Our results suggest that human brain signals can be mapped to agent performance, and richer signal granularity can be
extracted, highlighting a critical first step in creating an implicit, brain-driven HITL-RL framework.

2
Dataset

We formalize the structure of the complete dataset as D, and the subset of data from each participant k, may be denoted
as Dk. Dataset Dk further divides into two subsets, the neural data set and the task data set.

Neural Data Set | We define the neural dataset N k as the set of neural channel recordings over time for some participant
k. Let Ni ∈RM×T denote the neural signal data matrix at instance i, where M is the number of neural channels and T
is the number of timestamps. A single neural data vector at timestamp t across all channels can be denoted as xt ∈RM.
The signal at a specific timestamp t and channel m can be expressed as xtm, where t ∈{1, . . . , T} and m ∈{1, . . . , M}.

Task Data Set | We define the Task Dataset Hk as the set of learning task statistics over time for some participant k. Let
Hi ∈RP ×T represent the task data matrix at instance i, where P is the number of task variables and T is the number of
timestamps.

We may describe a vector of task variables/statistics as Hk = {St, At, Rt, St+1, Vt, Bt, Et}t=T
t=0 , where St is the agent’s
state at time t, At is the action chosen by the agent or human, Rt is the reward, St+1 is the next state, and Vt, Bt, Et
represent agent optimality values. An instance of a task data point at some timestamp for some specific statistic type can
be denoted as htp, where t ∈{1, . . . , T} and p ∈{1, . . . , P}.

V ∈RT is used to denote a set of discrete classification labels, where vt is a discrete number that correlates to agent
performance or optimality at time t.
Similarly, we use B to denote a set of binary labels that correlates to agent
performance. Finally, E is used denote a set of continuous optimality labels, where et is a continuous number that
represents the error between an agent’s chosen action and the chosen action of a set of near-optimal policies.

After the raw neural data has been pre-processed, we propose that some relationship exists between features of
the neural data and the learning task statistics outlined above. We let ˆy = ϕ(xi, hi) denote the relationship between a
vector of human neural data at some instance and its optimality label.

3
Methodology

Participants We recruited 25 participants for a partially within-participants study. Participants were between 19-27 years
old and were recruited through physical and virtual fliers in a university setting and online.

Domains | An agent A may operate in one of three OpenAI Gymnasium’s Reinforcement
Learning environments. The Robot environment offered the following continuous actions:
x-axis, y-axis, z-axis, gripper. The Lunar Lander environment offered the following
discrete actions: up, left, right, down. The Flappy Bird environment offered the following
discrete actions: up, down.

Experiment Procedure | Participants were given an informed consent form, configured to the
fNIRS device, and instructed on the task. Then, they completed the task, and responded to
two post-experiment questionnaires which included a standard NASA-TLX.

Participants completed three or four out of six tasks dependent on time as to not exceed 60 min-
utes of procedure. These tasks lasted anywhere from 2-5 minutes each. Tasks were randomly
selected, and could be any combination of a domain (3) and some task condition (2), resulting
in six unique tasks. Task conditions were either passive or active. Passive tasks instructed par-
ticipants to observe and reflect on the performance of an autonomous agent interacting within
its environment. Active tasks instructed participants to physically guide an agent towards its
goal state through the use of a keyboard or joystick. Participants are seated 24 inches from a
computer screen, and a 20-second pause calibrates the fNIRS device before the task begins.

Passive Condition | The passive condition, or ”watch” demonstration, instructed participants
to observe an agent achieve some goal in a given domain. The autonomous agent initially
selects actions from a near-optimal policy and can be described as successful. With probability
p, the agent transitions to a sub-optimal action-selection state, becoming unsuccessful during
that episode. In an environment with a discrete action space, sub-optimal actions are selected
by altering the probability distribution to select a sub-optimal action. In an environment with
a continuous action space, some magnitude of noise, or the agent’s goal state was altered. In
our experiments, p was roughly equivalent to 0.3.

Figure 2: OpenAI Gymna-
sium environments.

The agent continues to navigate the environment until the end of the task. The neural data, learning tasks statistics, and
timestamps are stored in a hash-map and saved as a de-identified ’watch demonstration’.

Active Condition | The active condition, or ”play” demonstration, instructs a participant to attempt the task themselves,
guiding an agent towards some goal in a given domain. Participants used an Xbox controller to control the robot, and a
basic computer keyboard to guide Flappy Bird and Lunar Lander agents. At the beginning of the task, the participant had
to learn how to navigate the agent, but the goal was made clear. As they play, a one-hot vector was saved, representing
the participant’s selected action.

During the task, the participant’s neural data, learning task statistics, and timestamps are stored in a hash-map for each
episode and saved as a whole, de-identified ’play demonstration’.

4
Machine Learning Approaches

Pre-Processing and Feature Extraction | The raw fNIRS data was calibrated using the 20-second baseline at the beginning
of each trial. The raw data was pre-processed using a 4th order Butterworth filter. Pre-processed data includes two
features of the neural signals including phase and intensity values of the left and right pre-frontal cortex.

We derive a feature vector F ∈RL×T from the pre-processed neural signals, where T is the set of timestamps and L is the
number of features. These features include mean, standard deviation, slope, intercept, skewness and kurtosis, resulting
in a vector of length 8 · x, where x is the number of features used. Each feature vector corresponds to an optimality label.

Sliding Window Approach for Time Classification | We use a sliding window approach that extracts a fixed duration
of x seconds, where each window is assigned a single label. This label is defined based on the unique, final endpoint
timestamp associated with the window. The endpoint of each window signifies the desired moment for evaluating the
fNIRS data. We use a window large enough to encompass average latency associated with the hemodynamic response:
approximately 5-7 seconds.

We denote our time series as: xi,p
1:T = [xi,p
1 , xi,p
2 , . . . , xi,p
T ] where each subject i has a series of T vectors, x, each terminating
at an endpoint p. Each vector xi,p
t
∈RD represents data at time t within a total of T timesteps. The endpoint p is
associated with a label yi,p ∈Y.

Figure 3: Classification Model Performance: Target class F1 score across models for each task condition.

Machine Learning Algorithms | We train a Support-Vector Machine (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree,
Random Forest and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to determine which method produces the most valuable model. Each
model is trained and tested on a set of participants from a specific condition. Models are then tested on data from
different conditions to determine transferability without fine-tuning.

Classifiers | To identify action optimality in both classifiers and regressors, both discrete, binary and continuous classi-
fication labels are saved. These labels are determined by the degree of failure and the point of failure. The degree of failure
is an error value that determines how sub-optimal a selected action was. The point of failure is the moment within the
episode where an agent begins to fail, usually a few seconds before the sparse reward indicates a lost episode.

Multi-Policy Action Agreement | To calculate these values, we’ve designed a multi-policy action classification system. In
any reinforcement learning problem, there may be more than one optimal path to the same goal. To avoid labeling agent
behavior incorrectly, we compare the agent’s chosen action with 10 near-optimal policies. An error value is calculated
between the agent’s action and each near-optimal policies action before taking an average. Error is calculated using

Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence: Ek(t) = DKL (at ∥πk(st)) = Pn
i=1 at,i log

at,i
πk(st,i)

.

Binary Labels | Binary optimality labels are denoted as Bk ∈RT . At some time step t, Bk may be some binary number
from the set Bt = {0, 1} where 0 represents optimal behavior and 1 represents sub-optimal behavior. In an episode where
an agent fails, the point of failure is calculated and each feature vector afterwards is labeled sub-optimal.

Discrete Labels | Discrete optimality labels are denoted as Vk ∈RT . At some time step t, Vk may be some discrete
number from the set Vt = {0, 1, 2} where 0 represents optimal behavior, 1 represents sub-optimal behavior and 2 repre-
sents opposite, or worst-case behavior. In an episode where an agent fails, the point of failure and degree of failure is
calculated and each feature vector afterwards is labeled accordingly.

Continuous Labels | Optimal play errors can be denoted as Ek ∈Rm At some time step t, Ek may be some continuous
value where lower values indicate near-optimal play, and higher values indicate sub-optimal to worst-case play. The
error between the agent’s action at and the k-th near-optimal policy’s action πk(at) can be defined using the error function
mentioned.

5
Results

Our results revealed that classical machine learning algorithms can predict agent performance from fNIRS signals with
greater success than random chance. Random Forest, MLP and KNN models generally performed best when solving
classification problems. Random Forest and KNN generally outperformed other models when solving regression prob-
lems. Surprisingly, discrete models performed similarly to binary models (MLP Discrete-Class Across Conditions: 72.2%,
MLP Binary-Class Across Conditions: 76.7%). However, further analysis shows that discrete models struggled slightly
with differentiating sup-optimal performance from optimal and worst-case (Discrete Optimal - AVG: 76%, Discrete Sub-
Optimal - AVG: 67%, Discrete Worst-Case - AVG: 72%)
Feature type also made a significant difference in model performance. Simplifying the feature vector to mean, skewness,
and standard deviation allowed some models, like MLP, to dramatically increase performance (Non-optimized Features
F1 Score: 72%, Optimized Feature F1 Score: 86.3%). We believe this is partially due to lowering the dimensionality of the

Figure 4: Regression Performance: Actual values and predicted values for each regressor (Lunar Lander Passive).

6
Conclusion

Our study provides evidence that agent performance can be extracted from human neural data during some interaction.
Most models struggled with cross-participant and cross-domain transferability, a common limitation in Brain-Computer
Interface work. Other limitations include potential artifacts from fNIRS latency and noise, participant inattention, and
dataset imbalances. Therefore, future work should focus on three major avenues. First, we hope to improve general-
ization by employing deep learning and data balancing techniques. Further, we plan to explore ways to handle signal
latency, noise and participant inattention. Finally, we plan to apply this signal to a real-time RL framework and test its
ability to implicitly fine-tune agent behavior online.

We believe that reinforcement learning from neural feedback has undiscovered potential in fields like human-robot inter-
action, assistive AI, and various autonomous systems. Implicitly aligning agent behavior with human goals, expectations
and preferences may change the way people interact with and perceive artificial and robotic agents in the future.

References

[1]
Mohit Agarwal, Shyam Krishnan Venkateswaran, and Raghupathy Sivakumar. “Human-in-the-loop RL with an
EEG wearable headset: on effective use of brainwaves to accelerate learning”. In: Proceedings of the 6th ACM Work-
shop on Wearable Systems and Applications. Toronto Ontario Canada: ACM, June 19, 2020, pp. 25–30.
[2]
Riku Arakawa et al. “DQN-TAMER: Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning with Intractable Feedback”. In:
Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on Human-Robot Teaming Beyond Human Operational Speeds and Robot Teammates Operat-
ing in Dynamic, Unstructured Environments (2018).
[3]
Shaw Bronner et al. “Frontotemporal oxyhemoglobin dynamics predict performance accuracy of dance simulation
gameplay”. In: NeuroImage (2012).
[4]
Yuchen Cui et al. “The EMPATHIC Framework for Task Learning from Implicit Human Feedback”. In: Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Robot Learning. Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, Oct. 4, 2021, pp. 604–626.
[5]
Zhe Huang et al. “The Tufts fNIRS Mental Workload Dataset & Benchmark for Brain-Computer Interfaces that
Generalize”. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
2021.
[6]
W Bradley Knox and Peter Stone. “Augmenting Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback”. In: ICML 2011
Workshop on New Developments in Imitation Learning (2011).
[7]
Guangliang Li et al. “Human-Centered Reinforcement Learning: A Survey”. In: IEEE Transactions on Human-
Machine Systems 49.4 (2019), pp. 337–349.
[8]
Yue Li et al. “Real-time monitoring prefrontal activities during online video game playing by functional near-
infrared spectroscopy”. In: Journal of Biophotonics 11 (2018).
[9]
Sylvia Morelli, Matthew Sacchet, and Jamil Zaki. “Common and distinct neural correlates of personal and vicarious
reward: A quantitative meta-analysis”. In: NeuroImage 112 (2015), pp. 244–253.
[10]
Liang Wang et al. “Taming fNIRS-based BCI Input for Better Calibration and Broader Use”. In: The 34th Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. UIST ’21. New York, NY, USA, Oct. 12, 2021, pp. 179–
197.
[11]
Zeqiu Wu et al. “Fine-Grained Human Feedback Gives Better Rewards for Language Model Training”. In: Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023.
[12]
Duo Xu et al. “Accelerating Reinforcement Learning using EEG-based implicit human feedback”. In: Neurocomput-
ing 460 (Oct. 14, 2021), pp. 139–153. ISSN: 0925-2312.