Hayato Ishida‚àó‚Ä°, Amal Elsokary‚àó‚Ä°, Maria Aslam‚àó, Catherine White‚ÄÝ

, Michael J. de C. Henshaw‚àó, Member, IEEE, Siyuan Ji‚àó, Member, IEEE
‚àóLoughborough Quantum Systems Research Group, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, UK, {h.ishida, a.elsokary, m.aslam, m.j.d.henshaw,
‚ÄÝBT Research, Ipswich, UK,
‚Ä°Both authors contributed equally

arXiv:2508.15733v1 [cs.ET] 21 Aug 2025

Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) network systems use
quantum principles, such as superposition and entanglement,
to enable secure information transfer across distributed nodes.
A main use case for QKD network is to provide a com-
munication system that is secure against quantum computers,
for which QKD systems in principle provide an uncondition-
ally secure mitigation, while future quantum communication
networks (QCN) are anticipated to enable the transfer of
quantum information between quantum computers. Leveraging
a unified communication infrastructure with quantum and
classical channels, which are integrated to provide a com-
bined function, enables a wide range of use cases, such as
in QKD protocols, which require both. Implementation may
even involve physical commonalities such as co-propagation
of quantum and classical cryptography on a communication
medium, potentially reducing costs but at the risk of crosstalk
from the classical to the quantum channel [2].
It is acknowledged that the integration of quantum tech-
nologies into existing communication infrastructure presents
formidable challenges [3], partly attributed to the technological
complexity involved in quantum subsystems, such as their con-
trol and the management of their interfaces with the classical
environment in which they operate. This led to the proposal
of taking tailored systems engineering approaches to manage
such complexity [4], which later evolved into a distinct, cross-
disciplinary field, referred to as quantum systems engineering
(QSE) [5]. However, this discipline has not gained sufficient
momentum until recently, with recognition of the need to
take a structured approach to solving identified engineering
challenges [6]. A particular research direction in QSE is the
investigation of how MBSE could support the management of
quantum systems complexity, in the same way it has been
successfully applied to other complex systems (e.g. in the
defence and aerospace context). Given that quantum physi-
cists and engineers present their QKD network architecture
proposals with specialised language and drawings [7]‚Äì[11] that
are unlikely to be accessible to a wide range of stakeholders,
particularly all systems engineers, this naturally motivated
the idea of applying a standardised and universal modelling

Abstract‚ÄîRealisation of significant advances in capabilities of
sensors, computing, timing, and communication enabled by quan-
tum technologies is dependent on engineering highly complex
systems that integrate quantum devices into existing classical
infrastructure. A systems engineering approach is considered to
address the growing need for quantum-secure telecommunica-
tions that overcome the threat to encryption caused by maturing
quantum computation. This work explores a range of existing and
future quantum communication networks, specifically quantum
key distribution network proposals, to model and demonstrate
the evolution of quantum key distribution network architectures.
Leveraging Orthogonal Variability Modelling and Systems Mod-
elling Language as candidate modelling languages, the study
creates traceable artefacts to promote modular architectures that
are reusable for future studies. We propose a variability-driven
framework for managing fast-evolving network architectures
with respect to increasing stakeholder expectations. The result
contributes to the systematic development of viable quantum key
distribution networks and supports the investigation of similar
integration challenges relevant to the broader context of quantum
systems engineering.
Index Terms‚ÄîModel-Based Systems Engineering, Orthogonal
Variational Model, Quantum Systems Engineering

I. INTRODUCTION

The UK has invested over ¬£1 billion in quantum technolo-
gies since 2012 and is committed to a further ¬£2.5 billion over
the next ten years [1]. Quantum technologies offer massive
capability advances and investment opportunities if significant
challenges can be overcome. A major challenge is to move
from laboratory demonstration to practical devices and sys-
tems; this will be a focus for future investment, and the role
of Systems Engineers in managing the concomitant complexity
cannot be understated. In this paper, we present an approach
through which Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE)
can be applied to a contemporary quantum application, to
clarify the function and interfaces of quantum mechanical
elements in the system in a way that provides an accessible
high-level view even to the non-expert.

This work was partly supported by the Innovate UK [grant number
10102791]

Fig. 1: A hierarchical OVM+SysML model structure without
quantum-specific contents.

mechanics to carry out private key distribution between two
users. Because security relies on fundamental quantum laws,
principally the no-cloning theorem and contextuality, QKD
offers information-theoretically secure cryptography. By con-
trast, RSA, which is one of the most used classical crypto-
graphic protocols, is computationally secure, meaning that it
is dependent on the assumption of computational hardness
for security. Any eavesdropping attempt necessarily induces
detectable disturbances, enabling the communicating parties to
detect the presence of an eavesdropper and abort the protocol
when the channel is compromised.

II. BACKGROUND

This section provides essential background knowledge for
this work.

A. Quantum key distribution

QKD, first introduced by Bennett and Brassard in 1984
[12], known as the BB84 protocol, has been one of the
most active research fields in quantum information. A succes-
sion of protocols has since been developed, notably Ekert‚Äôs
entanglement-based scheme (E91) [13], and the measurement
device-independent (MDI) QKD [14], each addressing distinct
security and implementation challenges of previous protocols.
For any QKD protocol, it follows the following steps:
1) Quantum transmission: the legitimate parties (Alice
and Bob) exchange quantum states.
2) Sifting: public comparison of classical metadata (e.g.,
encoding and measurement bases) yields a correlated
raw key.
3) Post-processing: classical procedures such as error cor-
rection and privacy amplification produce an identical,
secret key.
Although the overarching framework is universal, individual
protocols vary in their state-preparation procedures, measure-
ment methodologies, and the reconciliation techniques applied
during post-processing. QKD utilises the laws of quantum

B. Model-based systems engineering

Model-based systems engineering (MBSE) expresses en-
gineering data through formal models rather than narrative
documents [15]. This approach enhances traceability, supports
explicit management of dependencies and interfaces, and
mitigates miscommunication within interdisciplinary teams‚Äîa
capability of particular importance to quantum technologies.
A further benefit of MBSE is its modularity: each subsystem
is represented as an independent module, which can be reused
or evolved with minimal impact on its neighbours. Such a
‚Äùdivide-and-conquer‚Äù approach allows engineers to grasp in-
dividual modules before addressing system-level interactions,
thereby reducing overall complexity.
The Systems Modelling Language (SysML) is the prevailing
standard for MBSE. All models in this study were developed
in SysML 1.7; adoption of the recently released SysML v2 is
expected to grow as modelling tools mature.

Orthogonal variability modelling (OVM), widely employed
in product-line engineering, captures variation points, associ-
ated variants and their interrelationships [16]. A variation point
denotes a system feature for which several implementation
options exist. OVM is therefore well suited to QKD networks,
where multiple protocol choices and corresponding architec-
tural implications must be represented. Moreover, the method
can portray prospective configurations, thereby supporting
forward-looking analysis of alternative system evolutions.

III. THE FRAMEWORK

A. Model Development Process

To explore the evolving QKD network architecture and
organise the complexities observed in the architectural designs,
inspired by reviewed works, specifically Model-Based Prod-
uct Line Engineering (MBPLE) by [17] and the variability-
realisation mechanism by [18], we present a model-based
QKD network architecture exploration framework in this sec-
tion. To avoid confusion, we highlight that this framework is
not a typical architectural framework (e.g., the Unified Archi-
tectural Framework), but outlines an approach for how a range
of known QKD network architectural entities, proposed or
realised, could be modelled by combining OVM and SysML,
to support the investigation and future development of a QKD
network system.

Fig. 3: OVM backbone derived from domain-specific knowl-
edge

Diagram, that is most appropriately aligned with the concept
of that variation point, will be utilised to model the range
of variants. This allows the variants to share a ‚Äôcommon‚Äô
view, with similar structures, such that stakeholders could
explore the differences between these variants without the need
to investigate other variation points. We highlight that this
framework presents an approach opposite to the one proposed
by Li [17], where variation points and variants are derived
from SysML-based system models. In our framework, the
SysML-based models are developed after the variation points
and variants are defined. This approach is supported by the
following fact: Unlike in the fields of software, automotive and
aerospace, where system models are often abundant, due to the
industrial uptake of model-driven development and MBSE, as
reviewed in the related work section, there is very limited work
in model-based QSE.
The second part of the framework is a process, shown in Fig.
2, that enables the development of a baseline model consisting
of the OVM backbone and the set of SysML diagrams that map
to the OVM variants. This part is quantum-specific.
Following the construct of the framework model structure,
one would naturally start the model development by defining
the OVM backbone following a top-down approach, where
one would identify and specify the first layer variation points
and the associated variants. Subsequently, one would follow
the model structure in Fig. 1 downward to complete the hier-
archy until a sufficient level of engineering detail is reached.
However, an initial investigation shows that this intuitive top-
down approach did not work well. This is primarily because
the evolution of quantum technologies is found to be driven by
breakthroughs at the component level rather than at the system
level, e.g., quantum memory device [19]. For this reason,
we propose an iterative, experimental, bottom-up process for
developing the OVM+SysML model.
Step 1 - Knowledge Gathering: This step is concerned with
gathering initial domain knowledge for the QKD network with

B. Model Structure

The first part of the framework is a non-quantum specific
model structure developed and presented in Fig. 1. As shown,
within a standard multi-layered hierarchical OVM [16], for
each of the variants in the OVM, a SysML-based diagram
is developed to provide a model-based specification of that
variant. This creates a one-to-one mapping between the OVM
and the SysML-based model. Then, for a group of variants
under a variation point, a specific diagram type, e.g., Activity

Fig. 2: Illustrative model development process (Steps 1 and 2
only) using quantum-specific knowledge.

1) identify structural and behavioural commonalities be-
tween variants.
2) group variants accordingly to define variation points that
generalise the concepts.
3) normalise the views for each variation point such that
a single SysML diagram is used consistently across the
group of variants.
Step 3 - Iteration: Acknowledge that there could be many
ways of organising the knowledge into an OVM backbone
structure, which would lead to different ways in normalising
the SysML diagrams against the variants, Step 3 is therefore
about experimenting with different OVM backbone structures
with potentially added knowledge that capturing most recent
breakthroughs in quantum technology development. This step
is dominated by trial-and-error, featuring an iterative devel-
opment process. While it can be difficult to optimise the
OVM backbone structure, we recommend that principles for
the experimentation be defined and used in driving this step.
For instance, the grouping should balance between a structure
that is sensible to quantum physicists and is intuitive for a
system engineer to model in SysML.
Step 4 - Configuration: Once the OVM+SysML model
is completed, configurations can be composed against stake-
holder needs. Specifically, for any given stakeholder‚Äôs needs,
instead of developing a QKD network architecture from
scratch, the systems engineers could work with quantum
engineers to quickly compose a meaningful configuration
through the selection of a set of variants. Then, the initial
architectural description would be the composition of the set
of corresponding SysML diagrams. We highlight that this
composed architectural description will not fully represent a
realistic QKD network. This is because the OVM+SysML
model structure does not address the interactions between vari-
ants. As such, this step also requires the necessary modification
of individual SysML diagrams to ensure consistency between
views and the creation of a configuration-specific interface
definition.

(a) BB84 QKD

(b) MDI-QKD

(c) Ekert-QKD (E91)

IV. VALIDATION

Fig. 4: QKD protocol processes.

The framework is validated in this section to show its
applicability and scalability. Firstly, a baseline OVM+SysML
model is developed guided by the framework proposed in the
previous section. This is then followed by a case study, which
demonstrates how an initial architecture can be quickly com-
posed to address a high-level stakeholder need. The section is
concluded with a discussion of the benefits and limitations of
the proposed framework.

sufficient details to enable the next step, but does not need to
be exhaustive. For instance, this would include the latest exper-
imental results on the realisation of quantum behaviours that
promise commercial viability, validated GitHub repositories
that provide digital twins of quantum devices, and community-
accepted standards that benchmark quantum technologies.
Step 2 - Model Development: Using the gathered knowl-
edge as the basis, we then derive an initial list of non-grouped
‚Äôvariants‚Äô that represent key quantum features, e.g., quantum
teleportation. Then, for each of the variants, we test using
different SysML Diagrams to capture the core concepts of
that variant. After having an initial set of views (SysML

A. The OVM Backbone and SysML Views

Firstly, the initial list of variants is defined based on a broad
review of relevant works, such as Refs [8]‚Äì[10], [20]. These
variants are shown in Fig. 3. The groupings of the variants
define the variation points (VP) and their hierarchical structure,
also shown in the diagram. As an example, different types

(a) Direct Q-Link

(b) Q-Link with Entanglement Swapping

Fig. 5: Quantum Link Variability

(a) Terrestrial-based medium
(b) Satellite-based medium.

Fig. 6: QKD network medium.

The network must also be resilient; thus, it shall have re-
dundancies that would ensure the network continues operating
securely if one of its channels is attacked. QKD is the preferred
technology to test feasibility.
In discussion with quantum systems engineers, these stake-
holder needs have led to the selection of the following variants:

B. Case Study: Long Range Communication

To demonstrate the effectiveness of composing an initial
architectural description from the OVM+SysML model, we
carried out the following case study.
A synthetic stakeholders‚Äô use case is formulated as follows:
A secure network is needed for long-range communication.

‚Ä¢ For the Medium VP, both satellite and terrestrial variants
are selected to ensure the network will still be available
in case one of the channels fails or is being attacked:

‚Ä¢ For the QKD Protocol VP, the BB84 protocol is selected

‚Ä¢ For the Q-Link VP, QR is selected as the direct quantum
link will not achieve system fidelity
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 illustrate the results obtained from carrying
out Step 4 of the process. The views associated with the
selected variants are composed, as depicted in Fig. 7(a). These
views then modified into a set of new views to enhance
consistency, as in Fig. 7(b), serving the initial behavioural and
structural architectural description for the configuration. The
revised model finally enables the interface definition for this
particular QKD network architecture. This interface definition
is captured using an internal block definition diagram, as
shown in Fig. 8.

Fig. 8: Interface definition for the composed configuration.

However, when reflecting on the framework process, we
highlight that the framework is much less useful to domains
in which system architecture is significantly more mature,
e.g., aircraft that use jet engines. This is because the primary
capability of this framework is to enable the exploration of
unrealised system architecture through a bottom-up approach.
Scalability- A typical concern for any model-based approach
for systems engineering is its scalability against increasing
system complexity. This is because the number of model
elements (including relationships) increases quickly as the
system size grows. Methods that rely on manual processes
are less likely to be scalable. We argue that our framework
offers scalability in the sense that the OVM backbone can
be extended by adding more VPs or variants at any time,
with respect to new breakthroughs. This is a feature inherited
from using OVM to construct the product line model. The
challenge in scaling the OVM potentially lies with the need
for a completely new backbone structure, perhaps due to a
disruptive technology breakthrough that leads to a void of
legacy variants.
The part that is not as scalable is the configuration process.
As the number of VPs and variants grows, the manual inter-
vention required to refine the views for consistency could be-
come infeasible. To address this challenge, as a potential future
work, an automation mechanism to enable synchronisation of
views [24] could be developed. The automation mechanism
could consider extending the OVM backbone structure to
include dependencies between variants, such that the growth
of the configuration space size is manageable [25].

C. Discussion

Practicality-
The
successful
development
of
the
OVM+SysML model guided by the framework, together
with the successful completion of the case study, proves the
practicality of the framework in the exploration of QKD
network architecture. However, it is also clear that both the
model and the case study are simple validations for the
purpose of demonstration. A more comprehensive validation
would require a number of case studies with different
stakeholder needs that lead to different configurations. Such a
validation is necessary before the framework to be deployed
for industrial-level studies.
One could argue that to enhance the practicality of the
framework, capabilities such as architecture evaluation against
the stakeholder needs, though out of scope for this work, could
be desirable for a future version.
Adaptability- Although the framework is developed specif-
ically for the exploration of QKD network architecture, it
is observed that the framework could be adapted to other
types of systems that utilise different quantum technologies,
and could be potentially made domain-independent. This is
because the model structure proposed in the framework, as
shown in Fig. 1, is non-quantum specific, meaning that one
could, in principle, interpret any knowledge into it, following
a structure-preserving paradigm discussed in [23].

V. RELEVANT WORKS

A. Quantum Systems Engineering

The need for a systems engineering approach in the develop-
ment of quantum systems or technologies has been discussed
previously [4], [5], [26], with those studies principally address-
ing the challenges that QSE must resolve. QSE differs from a
direct application of systems engineering to quantum systems.
It is not simply a matter of scaling familiar methods to a more
complex system or technology: quantum technologies operate
under entirely different physical laws, where superposition, en-
tanglement, and quantum measurement replace the determinis-

(a) Composed SysML views (b) Modified SysML views

Fig. 7: Initial QKD network architecture description.

QKD network systems are complex because they integrate
both classical and quantum components, and the variety of
QKD protocols and their architectures is continually expand-
ing. To manage this complexity and variability, this study
investigates MBPLE, the fusion of MBSE‚Äôs system-wide trace-
ability with PLE‚Äôs variability management. MBSE provides
engineers with a clear, consistent model of the whole system,
but its built-in support for variation points is limited; con-
sequently, engineers frequently duplicate models when many
product variants are needed [17]. Conversely, PLE captures
variability via feature or option models but lacks explicit
traceability from each selection to behavioural, structural,
and verification artefacts [33]. Combining the two approaches
yields a single traceable system model while enabling safe
selection and reuse of variants [18].
Among the variability-realisation mechanisms catalogued
by Sch¬®afer et al. [18], three mechanisms are particularly well
suited to a QKD-network product line:

‚Ä¢ Module replacement enables engineers to substitute
protocol-specific devices (e.g., decoy-state sources or
entangled-photon detectors) without modifying the base-
line classical control model.

‚Ä¢ Conditional compilation retains alternative security prim-
itives within a single over-specified SysML model and
selects the appropriate primitive at build time.

‚Ä¢ Polymorphism associates different key-management algo-
rithms with a common interface, preserving higher-level
orchestration.
Complementing
these
design-time
tactics,
Li
et
al.‚Äôs
requirement-level variability modelling propagates feature se-
lections from stakeholder needs through functional, logical
and physical views, preserving end-to-end traceability‚Äîan
essential property for security-accredited QKD deployments
[17]. Variation points are specified once in the requirements
view and then propagated into block, behavioural and para-
metric diagrams, preserving traceability without additional
diagrammatic clutter [17].
For a QKD network, as shown in previous sections, variant
choices such as protocol family and quantum-link may be
specified once and automatically propagated through func-
tional, logical, and physical SysML layers, preserving con-
sistency and traceability across every network variant [17].

B. UML and SysML for Quantum Systems

Several previous studies have addressed the challenges
of modelling quantum systems. Although quantum software
engineering differs from quantum systems engineering (QSE),
it shares foundational concepts such as the Unified Mod-
elling Language (UML) and the Systems Modelling Lan-
guage (SysML). Silverman and Jiron [30] present the use
of MBSE and SysML for quantum systems with a focus on
quantum computing and architecture. Research applying UML
to quantum software is more extensive than research in QSE.
Prior studies have used UML to model quantum software or
algorithms [31], [32]. These studies concentrate on quantum
circuit-level models, which may not scale to the thousands
of qubits anticipated in future quantum computers. Work by
P¬¥erez-Castillo and Piattini [31] extends UML for quantum
software; however, this extension cannot be applied directly
to broader quantum systems that include hardware elements.
Although previous studies have aimed to model quantum
systems, prior efforts have not fully resolved the challenges
identified by Everitt et al [5]. This outcome is unsurprising
because the cited studies address quantum software rather
than complete quantum systems. Consequently, a substantial
research gap persists. This paper addresses some of the SysML
modelling challenges for quantum systems; however, precise
SysML representation of uniquely quantum features (e.g.,
entanglement) remains a topic for future work.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

This work presented a model-based framework for exploring
fast-evolving QKD network architectures while addressing
stakeholder expectations. The approach enables stakeholders to
investigate the impact of adopting quantum technology in their
systems without committing to fully developing requirements
and architecture. By leveraging OVM, the framework enables
rapid creation and assessment of configurations.
Currently, QKD network technologies remain in early de-
velopment, with few practical implementations. As quantum
communication networks mature, this framework will serve

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

C. White, M. Henshaw and S. Ji acknowledge support by
QAssure, an Innovate UK-funded project, part of the Quantum
Challenge within the UK National Quantum Technologies
Programme.

CREDIT AUTHORSHIP CONTRIBUTION STATEMENT

Hayato Ishida: Investigation, Methodology, Visualisation,
Writing - Original draft. Amal Elsokary: Investigation,
Methodology, Visualisation, Writing - Original draft. Maria
Aslam: Writing - Review and Editing. Catherine White:
Validation, Writing - Review and Editing. Michael J. de C.
Henshaw: Supervision, Writing - Review and Editing. Siyuan
Ji: Conceptualisation, Supervision, Writing - Original draft,
Writing - Review and Editing.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Wilkes, S. Brawley, S. Benjamin, S. Brierley, W. Chalupczak,
D. Cielecki, T. Cubitt, M. Haji, A. Hammond, J. Hance et al., ‚ÄúQuantum
computing, sensing, and communications,‚Äù POSTnote, 2025.
[2] P. Tan, T. Wang, H. Zhao, Z. Tan, P. Huang, and G. Zeng, ‚ÄúSimultaneous
quantum and classical communication via multiparameter modulation,‚Äù
Physical Review A, vol. 109, no. 3, p. 032621, 2024.
[3] A. Orieux and E. Diamanti, ‚ÄúRecent advances on integrated quantum
communications,‚Äù Journal of Optics, vol. 18, no. 8, p. 083002, 2016.
[4] M. J. d. C. Henshaw, M. J. Everitt, V. M. Dwyer, J. Lemon, and S. C.
Jones, ‚ÄúThe challenges for systems engineers of non-classical quantum
technologies,‚Äù arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05643, 2017.
[5] M. J. Everitt, J. D. C. Michael, and V. M. Dwyer, ‚ÄúQuantum systems
engineering: A structured approach to accelerating the development of
a quantum technology industry,‚Äù in 2016 18th International Conference
on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1‚Äì4.
[6] R. Claridge, R. Hancock, D. Harvey, G. Marshall, T. Rabbets,
J. Vovrosh, and P. Yates. (2024) Quantum technologies: a new
frontier for systems engineering? The Institution of Engineering
and Technology (IET). Accessed 16 June 2025. [Online]. Available:

futures-policy/reports-and-papers/quantum-technologies-a-new-frontier-
for-systems-engineering
[7] W. Chen, Z.-F. Han, T. Zhang, H. Wen, Z.-Q. Yin, F.-X. Xu, Q.-L.
Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, X.-F. Mo et al., ‚ÄúField experiment on a ‚Äústar
type‚Äù metropolitan quantum key distribution network,‚Äù IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 575‚Äì577, 2009.
[8] M. Peev, C. Pacher, R. All¬¥eaume, C. Barreiro, J. Bouda, W. Boxleitner,
T. Debuisschert, E. Diamanti, M. Dianati, J. F. Dynes et al., ‚ÄúThe secoqc
quantum key distribution network in vienna,‚Äù New journal of physics,
vol. 11, no. 7, p. 075001, 2009.
[9] M. Sasaki, M. Fujiwara, H. Ishizuka, W. Klaus, K. Wakui, M. Takeoka,
S. Miki, T. Yamashita, Z. Wang, A. Tanaka et al., ‚ÄúField test of quantum
key distribution in the tokyo qkd network,‚Äù Optics express, vol. 19,
no. 11, pp. 10 387‚Äì10 409, 2011.