Adetayo Adebimpe, Helmut Neukirchen, Thomas Welsh
Department of Computer Science, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland
{ama59, helmut,

make honeypots more dynamic due their natural language pro-
cessing power and knowledge of computer systems, protocols
and languages. However, LLMs suffer from several drawbacks,
including increased resource usage and cost (depending on
the model size model and deployment), and slow response
time. Hallucination is another issue, where the LLM presents
false information as fact (caused due to lack of information
in training data). All these factors can reduce the realism and
indicate to an attacker that the system is a honeypot.
A wide variety of LLM models are available. We aim to
use lightweight local LLMs, i.e. models with a low number
of trained parameters: Due to their smaller size, Lightweight
LLMs can achieve faster speeds and also allow for local
deployment (i.e. without the need for an external LLM ser-
vice). The speed increases may introduce more realism, and
keeping the operation within a local system assures privacy
by not sending sensitive data to a public cloud as it would
be the case for LLMs that are offered as a service. However,
the smaller LLM size may reduce accuracy in responses and
increase hallucinations. One approach to reduce hallucinations
and to increase accuracy in low parameter models is Retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) [7]. RAG leverages retrieval
from an external knowledge base and generation of context-
aware and accurate responses, therefore enhancing a generative
model through external information. However, so far, RAG is
mostly used in the case of document extraction and summa-
rization and has not been extensively studied for honeypots.
This work is driven by the following research questions:

Abstract—Honeypots are decoy systems used for gathering
valuable threat intelligence or diverting attackers away from
production systems. Maximising attacker engagement is essential
to their utility. However research has highlighted that context-
awareness, such as the ability to respond to new attack types,
systems and attacker agents, is necessary to increase engage-
ment. Large Language Models (LLMs) have been shown as
one approach to increase context awareness but suffer from
several challenges including accuracy and timeliness of response
time, high operational costs and data-protection issues due to
cloud deployment. We propose the System-Based Attention Shell
Honeypot (SBASH) framework which manages data-protection
issues through the use of lightweight local LLMs. We investigate
the use of Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) supported
LLMs and non-RAG LLMs for Linux shell commands and
evaluate them using several different metrics such as response
time differences, realism from human testers, and similarity to
a real system calculated with Levenshtein distance, SBert, and
BertScore. We show that RAG improves accuracy for untuned
models while models that have been tuned via a system prompt
that tells the LLM to respond like a Linux system achieve without
RAG a similar accuracy as untuned with RAG, while having a
slightly lower latency.
Index Terms—honeypot, large language models (LLMs), local
inference, system prompt tuning, Retrieval Augmented Genera-
tion (RAG)

arXiv:2510.21459v1 [cs.CR] 24 Oct 2025

I. INTRODUCTION

Acquiring accurate and actionable threat intelligence is cru-
cial to cybersecurity. Honeypots are an approach to gathering
threat intelligence in which intentionally vulnerable systems
are used to lure human or automated attackers to understand
their attack vectors and even as decoys from real systems [1].
Honeypots range from high-interaction, which are full sys-
tems but have high complexity and therefore come with the
danger of allowing attackers to escape and attack production
systems; or low-interaction which are more secure as they
are emulated systems yet suffer from a lack of realism [1].
Balancing realism and security of the honeypot to increase
attacker engagement while being secure is a principal factor
in honeypot system design. Low-interaction honeypots tend
to employ static responses which lack context-awareness and
the ability to respond dynamically to attacker requests [2].
This reduces the realism and prevents the collection of threat
intelligence for new and emerging attack types.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently been shown
to respond effectively to dynamic user input in a wide variety
of contexts including cybersecurity [3] [4], text generation [5]
and code generation [6]. Therefore, LLMs have the potential to

• RQ1) How much does a RAG-based LLM honeypot
approach improve accuracy compared to a non-RAG
LLM honeypot approach?

• RQ2) How much does a RAG-based LLM honeypot
affect response time compared to a non-RAG LLM
honeypot?

• RQ3) How realistic is to a human the output of a RAG-
based LLM honeypot?

The rest of this paper is structured as follows: following
this section, related work is reviewed in the next section.
Section III introduces our System-Based Attention Shell Hon-
eypot (SBASH) framework for creating LLM honeypots for
arbitrary shell-based system types using local inference. A
proof-of-concept implementation using the SBASH framework
and evaluation results are provided in Section IV. Section V
discusses these results and Section VI concludes the paper.

HoneyLLM [8] is a shell-based honeypot using in-context
learning and leverages LLMs to provide realistic output to
the user and thus provide context awareness. This approached
achieved an 88% in terms of response accuracy. It used
commercial LLMs such as GPT3.5-turbo, GPT-4o, Claude-2,
Claude-3-haiku, and Claude-3-opus. These are large parameter
models which means that they are not suitable for on-premise
deployment, posing challenges to data security and sovereignty
for an organisation in a sensitive area such as cybersecurity.
LLM in the shell [2] is an approach that uses prompt
engineering techniques (few-shot prompting [9] combined
with chain of thought (COT) [10]) to create more accurate
responses. The approach was evaluated on 12 human partici-
pants who executed 76 unique commands and were asked to
identify if they were false, achieving 90% response accuracy.
The authors highlight the cost of their approach using the GPT
3.5-Turbo 16k model as $0.4 per 30 minutes of active use.
Limbosh [11] is a shell-based honeypot that has as key
feature that it is modular, e.g., arbitrary LLMs can be used as
long as they support the OpenAI API1 which includes the pos-
sibility to use LLMs that run locally. In comparison to LLM in
the shell, no prompt engineering approaches are used but rather
prompt templating. By using rudimentary prompts, complexity
is reduced and applicability to different deployment scenarios
is enhanced. Also, prompt injection mitigation techniques
are used: input delimiting and input/output guarding. The
approach is evaluated by four expert participants, three of
them were convinced the shell was real. The participant who
identified it as a real system noted it suffered from bugs and
had crashed. The low response time of the system was also
noted. Accuracies were not provided.
Decoypot [12] is a honeypot that mimics web API re-
sponses. Even though it is not a shell-based honeypot, it is
listed here as related work because it uses RAG. A two stage
semantic retrieval process is used to provide more accurate
responses and enhanced context awareness to allow for greater
gathering of threat intelligence: firstly, by identifying a similar
response from the prompt-request pair and secondly by com-
paring this selected response against the generated one. This
enhances the RAG processes by measuring the similarity score
of the response against reference responses and returning the
most accurate. This approached achieved an average similarity
score of 0.9780.
These existing works highlight the following challenges to
LLM based honeypots:

• Delay in responses. LLMs’ inferencing requires predic-
tion token by token which introduces a delay in response.

• High computational resources. Even the lightest LLMs
still need computational power for inferencing thus re-
sulting in high cost if commercial LLM services are
used. Previous studies have emphasized the high cost of
computation when using public cloud LLM services.
To address these challenges and research gaps, we propose
to leverage RAG to provide more dynamic responses while
also taking advantage of lightweight LLMs that run locally,
to enhance speed and to lower operational costs, while at the
same time ensuring enhanced data protection, i.e. sensitive
data does not flow to public cloud LLM service providers.
Independent from these technical challenges, it should also to
be noted that the related worked evaluated their solutions only
by using a small number of human participants as opposed to
using a multi-criteria evaluation that includes qualitative hu-
man evaluation as well as quantitative factors such a similarity
metrics and speed measurements.

III. SYSTEM BASED ATTENTION SHELL HONEYPOT - A
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

This section proposes the System-Based Attention Shell
(SBASH) framework – a framework to use a system type pa-
rameter to direct local LLMs to the required system shell type
as needed. It aims to improve realism of a honeypot by ensur-
ing the necessary sources of each system are implemented into
the honeypot to broaden its application. For example, it can be
used to produce honeypots for the various Linux and MacOS
shells and the filesystem layouts specific to these systems as
well as for the various Windows shells. It supports dynamism
to enhance realism and to solve the predictability problem
found in traditional honeypots. This conceptual framework
provides a methodological approach to address the challenges
posed to traditional and LLM honeypots.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the SBASH framework consists of
multiple components:

• The System Declaration component allows for a central-
ized parameter control system to allow for easy change
of shell types without modifying the main code of the
shell-based honeypot.
This centralized parameter is used to initialise the system
(e.g. hostname, database of commands, filesystem layout, and
RAG) by feeding into the four core modules (grey boxes in
Fig. 1) of the honeypot system:

• Inaccurate responses. Due to the data a model has been
trained on, it can either contain or not contain the needed
information as requested by the honeypot system, and
due to this limitation, the LLM may hallucinate and give
incorrect response. For example, the authors of LLM in
the shell report such a problem due to lack of information
about the presence or absence of the .bashrc file.

• Configuration System: This component adjusts the sys-
tem type based on variables that configure hostname, sys-
tem users, etc. This allows for consistent data to introduce

1

Fig. 1. SBASH Framework High-level Architecture

realism in correlation with the honeypot’s output. This
component ensures consistency in changes such as the
host name across all aspects of the system. It handles
also the session listener’s configuration which allows for
real-time monitoring of an attack.

A traditional honeypot cannot be modified to different needs
due to the way it has been shipped with pre-configured files,
directories, commands available, etc. In contrast, SBASH has
a high adaptability which means we can gather more threat
intelligence on different target systems and further improve on
realism without breaking the core performance of the system.

• Knowledge base generation: The RAG pipeline requires
a source that is referenced during retrieval and generation.
Upon the centralized system changes, this module auto-
matically loads the necessary RAG documents specific to
the system to be simulated by the honeypot, i.e. the shell
commands that are supported. This data could include
sample executions of each supported shell command or
even the manual page that describes that command.

A. Processing as imposed by the SBASH framework

Processing of an attackers shell input is supported by the
following stages of the SBASH framework:

1) Shell Type Parameter Change: The parameter that
determines the shell type (e.g. Bash shell) is set once
at the beginning to ensure the correct simulation of the
needed shell type.
2) Command Sanitization: Commands entered by the
malicious actor are checked with the list of all default
shell commands before sending that command to the
RAG for processing – to avoid prompt injection attacks
(e.g. sending to the LLM instead of a shell command a
question “Are you an LLM?”).
3) Command Classification: Commands are classified into
native, AI, and non-existing commands. Native com-
mands get executed without the intervention of AI:
usually, these are commands that do not require output,
but might, e.g., change file system states, i.e. commands
such as cd, mv, or rm. AI commands get sent to the
RAG system for processing. Non-existing commands
return a command not found error (with a syntax set
by the system type parameter) to the malicious actor.
4) RAG Processing: This involves the retrieval and gener-
ation, which references the already prepared knowledge
base for the usage of the honeypot system.
5) Threat Intelligence: During the communication be-
tween the user and the system, session and command
data (e.g. IP used to connect to the system, time and date,
command executed, command output) are collected.

• Directory generation: File system navigation and mod-
ification are necessary for realism of our shell honeypot.
A filesystem template is used to populate the filesystem
with the necessary default files and directories for the
system type. A data structure representing the target file
system can be taken from a real instance of that system
with additional pseudorandom mutations.

• LLM system prompting: This is one of the core com-
ponents as it directs the LLM to a better understanding of
the request. This allows for realistic output in accordance
with the other component configurations. The focus is on
the LLM’s preparation and tuning through having a more
guided instruct-model that understands the context of the
input. This can be achieved via the RAG’s prompt tem-
plate or by tuning the model’s system prompt (that cannot
be overridden by a malicious user prompt) itself (see
Footnote 4 in Section IV for the used system prompt).
By doing this, the honeypot system is more context-aware
and produces better responses without hallucination.
Using these components, the actual honeypot can be deployed
and via the configured listener (see Configuration System
component), the interactions of the attack with the system can
be logged and analysed, supporting threat intelligence.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS

• Gemma 3 (4B) (Tuned and Untuned): This is a 4B
parameter open-source model from Google.

To provide an evaluation of the SBASH system, Honey-
wareX2, a proof-of-concept, Linux Bash shell honeypot was
instantiated using the SBASH framework. This honeypot has
been implemented using Python and is utilises standrd Python
packages available via PIP, the package installer for Python.
Modules like logger, requests, subprocess have been imple-
mented that can be re-used in other honeypot implementations
that are based on the SBASH framework. We also borrowed
the fake filesystem approach from the Cowrie honeypot3 that
makes file modification and navigation commands as realistic
as possible.
The RAG-enhanced LLM system used in the proof-of-
concept implementation consists of four basic parts:

• Gemma 3 (12B) (Tuned and Untuned): This is a 12B
parameter open-source model from Google.

• Llama 3.1 (8B) (Tuned and Untuned): This is an 8B
parameter open-source model from Meta.

A. Accuracy Results

Three similarity measures were chosen to provide a com-
parison and understand the efficacy of each one for evaluating
accuracy of the responses.:

• Levenshtein: [13] A distance-based algorithm, it takes
insertion, deletion, and substitution of single char-
acters into consideration to calculate the similarity
score/percentage.

• Text Embedding: Text embedding was done using the
FASTEmbed model.

• SBert (Sentence-BERT): [14] A semantic embedding
paired with cosine similarity to calculate the similarity
score of sentences compared to the ground truth.

• Vector Store: Vector Store used the Llama index vector
store core.

• BertScore: [15] An evaluation metric also derived from
the BERT model, but uses an algorithm on both character
and word level to compare ground truth and candidate
for similarity. This allows for F1 precision recall score
(while the SBert score is a dense vector that represents
the sentence’s semantic meaning).
Table I shows the accuracy for the tuned and untuned LLMs
with and without RAG using the three similarity measures. It
can be seen that the tuned LLMs were more accurate than
the non-tuned LLMs. It can also be seen that for the untuned
LLMs, our RAG approach increases the accuracy significantly.
However, for the tuned LLMs, the non-RAG approach pro-
vided better overall accuracy than the RAG approach (see
discussion in Section V); however, this performance difference
was marginal. The larger LLMs perform in general better than
smaller LLMs, however the 8B Llama was often close to the
12B Gemma and had in some case even a better accuracy.

• Retrieval: Retrieval used the Llama index retrieval core
operation.

• LLM Generator: The RAG generation was done using
the 8B parameter Llama model.
The honeypot was evaluated in two different modes (RAG
and non-RAG) across three different LLMs ranging from 4B,
8B to 12B parameters, and using LLMs that were tuned (by
adding a system prompt telling the LLM to behave like a Linux
system4) and LLMs without such a system prompt tuning.
For the human testing, the 8B parameter tuned Llama 3.1
with RAG was used for the experiment. A predefined set of
commands (81 in total) was used for an automated evaluation
across all modes and models in respect of shell commands
typical for reconnaissance, post exploitation, and exfiltration
in cybersecurity.
The analysis of the system is based on similarity of the
honeypot output to a real Linux system Bash shell output,
execution time, and human evaluation. Similarity is evaluated
using various distance metrics and time difference is calculated
using the differences in the response latency. This was done
for all LLM models, both with RAG and non-RAG modes.
Evaluation by humans is done through manual usage of the
honeypot system and subsequent surveys.

B. Response Latency

Latency was measured in milliseconds (ms) using the timer
provided by Python. The response latency has been defined as
the duration between request and response across all system
processes leading to the execution of the commands. Response
time is one of the important factors that ensures realism in this
project. Due to the different LLMs used, varying response time
is expected. Latency was recorded across the three models
with and without RAG. As can be seen in Fig. 2, the RAG-
based approach had a higher mean latency across all the three
models. This can be attributed to the processing time added
by the RAG. The model parameter size does not necessarily
correlate with increased processing time as the Gemma 12B
model had lower latency than Gemma 4B and a marginal
difference between Llama 8B: the reason is that the smaller
model (Gemma 4B) was less accurate (see Section IV-A and

• RAG mode: In this mode, LLMs are pointed to an
external knowledge base for guidance and to alleviate
hallucination in the case of non-existing data.

2The source code, implementation details and assets used can be found on
GitHub:
3
4“You are a realistic Linux server. Respond to all inputs as if they
were Linux commands executed in a terminal. Provide only the output, no
explanations, and mimic typical Linux command behavior. If the input is not
a valid command, return an error message like a Linux shell would. Don’t
explain under any condition so you don’t expose yourself to the user as AI.”

Metric
Model
RAG Accuracy (%)
Non-RAG Accuracy (%)
RAG Tuned Accuracy (%)
Non-RAG Tuned Accuracy (%)

Levenshtein
Gemma 12B
20.7
1.4
21.9
24.6
Levenshtein
Gemma 4B
10.5
1.7
16.7
17.5
Levenshtein
Llama3.1 8B
19.0
2.9
21.3
20.0

SBert
Gemma 12B
47.7
35.0
49.2
56.0
SBert
Gemma 4B
35.8
35.3
41.6
45.0
SBert
Llama3.1 8B
52.4
34.8
52.5
53.2

BertScore
Gemma 12B
82.4
78.4
82.9
83.9
BertScore
Gemma 4B
78.6
77.9
80.8
81.4
BertScore
Llama3.1 8B
83.3
78.6
83.6
83.7

5=very realistic), see Fig. 3. After using the system for 5
minutes, they were provided a Google form link to fill out
a survey and give their review about the project. In addition
to answers based on a scale, also open-ended written feedback
was collected, and questions about the reasons for their rating
were asked. Users could also give feedback on what they think
can be used to improve the honeypot system.
Open-ended answers included, e.g., “...what mostly makes
it unrealistic is just that basic linux CLI commands aren’t
working. Like arrows to modify a command, tab, up for
previous commands. Of course some of these might be disabled
in some systems.” – which shows that command line editing
functionality improvements are needed. Another user also
pointed out the speed issue which could be a sign that the
honeypot was in fact a decoy.

Fig. 2. Model Performance - Execution Time of evaluated models and model
sizes with RAG and without RAG

D. Inference Cost

Computational cost due to inferencing of the LLMs is an
important aspect. In this work, inference time is defined as
the time it took for each request to process, from the time of
command submission to the full LLM’s output. Any request
that requires the inference of the LLMs are considered in this
evaluation. Every token output counts towards a computational
cost. All inferences were conducted on a single NVIDIA
H100 GPU rented on modal.com (for a real, privacy sensitive
honeypot, a local GPU would be used). For the human
evaluation and the automated evaluation, a total of 3 hours
was used: 56 minutes for the human testing, and the remaining
time went into the automated evaluation which required using
the Python subprocess module to automatically run the
commands and save its outputs in a text file.
The used NVIDIA H100 did cost $3.95 per hour which
means that the total cost of this evaluation were $11.85
for 3 hours of usage – extremely low computational cost
compared to the previous research pertaining to honeypots
requiring LLMs. The mean inference time for non-RAG was
shorter compared to RAG. This was expected due to the extra
computation that goes into storage and retrieval in RAG. For
RAG, an average inference time of 2008.6 ms was recorded
for the largest model (Gemma 12B), while 1557.8 ms was
recorded in non-RAG for the same model. Gemma 12B, being
a 12 billion parameter model, required more computational
resources compared to the smallest model (Gemma 4B). This
cost of $0.06 per hour accumulated to $40 per month.

Fig. 3. Realism rating from human testers: 1=very unrealistic, 5=very realistic

Table I) and did therefore tend to create longer output than
the larger models which increases execution time.

C. Realism Results

We evaluated the realism, dependent on human’s judgement
(which may differ from the automated similarity metric-based
evaluation). Several factors such as speed and accuracy have
been evaluated with human judgment. Nine individuals from
different field in computer science were selected to give their
judgement on the realism of the system. The participants had
varying technical background and were familiar with using a
shell. Four people considered themselves as beginner, another
four as intermediate, and one person declared having an
advanced competency in cybersecurity. The honeypot system
was accessed via SSH. For realism evaluation, the RAG-
enhanced tuned Llama 8B LLM was used.
Each participant was asked to rate the realism of the
honeypot on a 5-point Likert scale (with 1=very unrealistic,

Accuracy (RQ1): While RAG excelled for the untuned LLMs,
for LLMs instructed to create shell output via a tuned system
prompt, the non-RAG approach was slightly better which
indicates that the one-shot system prompt tuning technique
is better performing than the RAG LLM powered only with a
document containing manual/help pages of commands. Further
experiments are needed to understand whether a more appro-
priate RAG document would increase the RAG accuracy.
Response Latency (RQ2): For a realistic shell honeypot, la-
tency should be close to a real system. As shown in Section IV,
the average latency on the highest parameter model was a
2 second delay. This is too long to be considered close to a
real system. Moreover, the higher the number of parameter of
the LLM, the more resource intensive inferencing would be.
Speculative decoding [16] could yield a 2–4 times speed up
of the decoding step of an LLM: a small, fast model generates
a draft sequence of candidate tokens, which are then verified
in parallel by the larger, main model in a single forward pass.
We can expect that due to hardware improvements and LLM
optimisations, latency will improve in future, so that an LLM-
based honeypot’s latency becomes closer to the speed of a
real, low-resource system, e.g., a home router or IoT system.
Realism (RQ3): Some users complain about some interactivity
problem such as lack of nano and vim for editing files, arrow
keys for commands navigation, and tab for auto-completion.
All these shortcomings introduced a limited interactivity in
the system which reduces the realism rating for the human’s
rating. Despite this, the user still reported average of 4 out 5
for responsiveness. We have to point out a limitation due to the
small number of participants (n=9), but this number is similar
to the related works.
In addition to answering the research questions, the follow-
ing aspects are worth to be discussed:
Scalability: This system has not been put through a test on
large scale, like having thousands of requests hit it at once.
However we note the ability to scale is feasible but directly
constrained by the cost of inference.
Knowledge Base Limitation: The RAG document that was
used in this system was just the manual pages (man command
for all commands in directory bin on an Ubuntu Linux system
and their -h option help output); this however, might not be
the most effective accurate dataset. More datasets like the input
and output of all commands would be more effective to ensure
more accurate responses.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This project has received co-funding from the European
Union’s Digital Europe Programme under grant agreement no.
101127453 National Coordination Centre for Cybersecurity
in Iceland and 101127307 Defend Iceland: Nationwide bug
bounty platform.

REFERENCES

[1] N. Ilg, P. Duplys, D. Sisejkovic, and M. Menth, “A survey of contempo-
rary open-source honeypots, frameworks, and tools,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 220, 2023.
[2] M. Sladi´c, V. Valeros, C. Catania, and S. Garcia, “LLM in the shell: Gen-
erative honeypots,” in Europ. Symp. Secur. Priv. Workshops (EuroS&P).
IEEE, 2024.
[3] J. Zhang et al., “When LLMs meet cybersecurity: A systematic literature
review,” Cybersecurity, vol. 8, no. 1, 2025.
[4] M. Nizon-Deladoeuille, B. Stef´ansson, H. Neukirchen, and T. Welsh,
“Towards supporting penetration testing education with large language
models: an evaluation and comparison,” in Int. Conf. Soc. Netw. Analysis
Manag. Secur. (SNAMS).
IEEE, 2024.
[5] J. Wu et al., “A survey on LLM-generated text detection: Necessity,
methods, and future directions,” Comput. Linguist., vol. 51, no. 1, 2025.
[6] J. Jiang, F. Wang, J. Shen, S. Kim, and S. Kim, “A survey on
large language models for code generation,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., Jul. 2025.
[7] H. Yu et al., “Evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation: A survey,”
in BigData 2024.
Springer, 2025.
[8] C. Guan, G. Cao, and S. Zhu, “HoneyLLM: Enabling shell honeypots
with large language models,” in Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS).
IEEE, 2024.
[9] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. (NIPS).
Curran Assoc., 2020.
[10] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Proc. Syst. (NIPS).
Curran Assoc., 2022.
[11] S. Johnson, R. Hassing, J. Pijpker, and R. Loves, “A modular generative
honeypot shell,” in Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resil. (CSR).
IEEE, 2024.
[12] A. Sezgin and A. Boyacı, “DecoyPot: A large language model-driven
web API honeypot for realistic attacker engagement,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 154, 2025.
[13] L. Yujian and L. Bo, “A normalized Levenshtein distance metric,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 29, no. 6, 2007.
[14] J. Opitz and A. Frank, “SBERT studies meaning representations: De-
composing sentence embeddings into explainable semantic features,” in
Proc. 2nd Conf. Asia-Pac. Chapter Association Comput. Linguist. 12th
Int. Jt. Conf. Nat. Lang. Proces. (2nd AACL 12th IJCNLP).
Assoc.
Comput. Linguist. (ACL), 2022.
[15] T. Zhang, V. Kishore, F. Wu, K. Q. Weinberger, and Y. Artzi,
“BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT,” in Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent. (ICLR).
OpenReview.net, 2020.
[16] H. Xia et al., “Unlocking efficiency in large language model inference:
A comprehensive survey of speculative decoding,” in Findings Assoc.
Comput. Linguist. (ACL).
Assoc. Comput. Linguist. (ACL), 2024.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this work we presented SBASH, a framework to build
shell based honeypots for arbitrary systems: just by changing
configuration parameters (such as reference outputs of com-
mands and filesystem layout), different operating systems and
shells can be simulated. The framework takes advantage of
RAG to enhance the accuracy of low parameter LLMs that are
used to be able to run them locally to mitigate data protection
issues in public clouds. We illustrated that RAG improves
accuracy in untuned models at the expense of slightly longer