Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in
Lieu of Prompt Engineering

JAYANAKA L. DANTANARAYANA, University of Michigan, USA
SAVINI KASHMIRA, University of Michigan, USA
THAKEE NATHEES, Jaseci Labs, USA
ZICHEN ZHANG, University of Michigan, USA
KRISZTIAN FLAUTNER, University of Michigan, USA
LINGJIA TANG, University of Michigan, USA
JASON MARS, University of Michigan, USA

arXiv:2511.19427v1 [cs.SE] 24 Nov 2025

AI-Integrated programming is emerging as a foundational paradigm for building intelligent systems with large
language models (LLMs). Recent approaches such as Meaning Typed Programming (MTP) automate prompt
generation by leveraging the semantics already present in code. However, many real-world applications
depend on contextual cues, developer intent, and domain-specific reasoning that extend beyond what static
code semantics alone can express. To address this limitation, we introduce Semantic Engineering, a lightweight
method for enriching program semantics so that LLM-based systems can more accurately reflect developer
intent without requiring full manual prompt design. We present Semantic Context Annotations (SemTexts), a
language-level mechanism that allows developers to embed natural-language context directly into program
constructs. Integrated into the Jac programming language, Semantic Engineering extends MTP to incorporate
these enriched semantics during prompt generation. We further introduce a benchmark suite designed
to reflect realistic AI-Integrated application scenarios. Our evaluation shows that Semantic Engineering
substantially improves prompt fidelity, achieving performance comparable to Prompt Engineering while
requiring significantly less developer effort.

1
Introduction

AI-Integrated applications that rely on Large Language Models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly
common [3, 14, 25, 26]. AI-Integrated applications use LLMs at runtime to perform essential
functions, combining traditional programming with AI-driven capabilities. This shift is transforming
software development and reshaping how applications are designed and built.
Prompt Engineering (PE) has traditionally been the primary method for building such applica-
tions [23]. In this paradigm, developers manually craft natural-language prompts that define the
task, shape the model’s behavior, and enforce the desired output structure, as illustrated in the
top-left of Figure 1. However, this process is often tedious and unintuitive, requiring substantial
cognitive effort, domain expertise, and repeated trial-and-error to cope with the nondeterministic
nature of LLMs.
Meaning Typed Programming (MTP) [7] addresses the challenges of Prompt Engineering by
providing a simple language level mechanism for AI-Integration. Instead of manually writing
prompts, developers annotate a specific code construct such as a function, method, or object
initialization with the by llm operator as shown in the middle left of Figure 1, to indicate that its
behavior should be executed by an LLM. This simple annotation eliminates much of the manual
effort in Prompt Engineering and significantly reduces developer overhead, as shown in the right
side plot of Figure 1. When used, the MTP compiler extracts the construct’s semantics (its type
hierarchy and identifiers) into an intermediate representation called the Meaning-Typed IR (MT-IR).

Authors’ Contact Information: Jayanaka L. Dantanarayana, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA,
Savini Kashmira, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, Thakee Nathees, Jaseci Labs, Ann Arbor,
USA, Zichen Zhang, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, Krisztian Flautner,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA, Lingjia Tang, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA,
Jason Mars, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA,

2
Dantanarayana et al.

Prompt Engineering (PE)

I
I

def genar at e_pl an ( . . . ) :

Missing
Developer
Intent

"Prompt"

LLM Inference

I

Output Handling

I

Meaning-Typed Programming (MTP)

def genar at e_pl an ( . . . ) - > l i st [ Pl an] by l l m( )

Semantic Engineering

Manual
Prompt
Crafting
PE
MTP
Semantic Engineering

Automated

Prompt
Genaration

def genar at e_pl an ( . . . ) - > l i st [ Pl an] by l l m( )

sem Pl an = " Pl anni ng St ep of an AI Agent "
sem Pl an. t ask = " Task t o be per f or med"

Fig. 1. The left side illustrates three ways to implement the same functionality using LLMs; Prompt Engi-
neering, Meaning-Typed Programming (MTP), and Semantic Engineering. The plot on the right shows how
these approaches differ in developer effort and performance: Prompt Engineering delivers high performance
but requires heavy manual effort; MTP reduces effort through automated prompt generation but loses per-
formance when developer intent is missing; Semantic Engineering restores missing intent and elevate MTP
performance closer to Prompt Engineering with far less effort.

The runtime then automatically generates prompts from MT-IR and interprets model responses in
a type safe and context aware manner.
The original MTP system demonstrates strong performance on standard benchmarks such as
GSM8K [6], a grade school math problem dataset, which prior work [3, 7, 11] commonly adopts to
evaluate AI-Integration frameworks. These benchmarks involve relatively straightforward tasks
whose required semantics can be inferred directly from code. However, real world AI-Integrated
applications are often far more nuanced. Our analyses of a public repository of prompts from de-
ployed agentic systems [28] shows that practical prompts frequently encode contextual instructions,
constraints, and planning steps that do not appear in code semantics alone. Since MTP derives
meaning only from explicit program constructs, some of the additional intent may go unrepresented.
As suggested in Figure 1, this mismatch can lead to a potential performance gap between MTP and
manually crafted prompts when applications require richer task guidance.
While MTP relies on program semantics to provide structure and consistency, developers often
express additional intent such as reasoning steps, constraints, or preferences that do not appear
in formal code syntax. Without a way to convey this missing intent, developers would be pushed
back toward manual Prompt Engineering, bringing back significant overhead and reducing the
value of automation. Therefore, a lightweight method is needed to express these supplementary
semantics, enabling MTP to capture the full scope of developer intent in its generated prompts
without adding burden. This corresponds to the green region in Figure 1, which lies between the
extremes of fully automated prompt generation and manual prompt crafting.
We refer to this broader paradigm as Semantic Engineering, the practice of enriching program
semantics to more precisely convey developer intent to LLMs. Instead of crafting natural language
prompts, developers express additional intent through lightweight semantic annotations that refine
or extend the semantics already present in the code. These annotations are then used to augment the
semantics that guide automatically generated prompts, resulting in richer and more context aware
instructions for the model. In essence, Semantic Engineering makes programs more expressive for
both humans and LLMs without bringing back the burden of manual prompt construction.

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
3

Existing annotation mechanisms such as comments and docstrings offer only partial support
for what Semantic Engineering requires. Comments are not always structured or precise and they
often contain unrelated information intended for developers rather than meaningful semantic
intent. Docstrings are more structured, but they apply only to specific constructs such as classes or
functions and cannot capture semantics across other code entities. As a result, there is no systematic
way to attach structured and interpretable semantics to all code entities.
To address this limitation, we introduce Semantic Context Annotations (SemText), a new
language level mechanism for semantic annotation. SemText combines the flexibility of comments,
which can appear anywhere in a program, with the structural grounding of docstrings, which
attach to specific program entities. As shown in the bottom right of Figure 1, SemText can be added
alongside program constructs and used to enrich MTP by providing the additional semantics that
its automated prompt generation needs.
This allows the compiler to bind natural language semantics directly to program constructs and
preserve them during compilation in the Meaning-Typed Intermediate Representation (MT-IR) [7],
which is the internal representation used by MTP to capture the meaning of code. By doing so,
SemTexts extend MTP’s semantic reach, enabling it to incorporate developer intent naturally during
prompt generation.
We implement SemText in Jac, a production-grade Python-superset language that includes a
transpiler to Python bytecode [16–18], and in which MTP was also implemented. A new compiler
pass associates SemText annotations with their corresponding constructs through semantic analysis
and extends the MT-IR with these enriched semantics. This enables the runtime to integrate natural
language context during prompt generation, aligning the model’s interpretation with developer
intent.
Our evaluation shows that although MTP captures much of a program’s explicit semantics, it can
fall short of traditional Prompt Engineering in tasks where implicit developer intent is essential.
By enriching programs with SemTexts, we restore this missing intent directly within the code.
In several complex applications, we observe that prompts which previously required hundreds
of lines of text can be replaced with only a few lines of SemTexts while achieving comparable or
even better accuracy. Empirically, SemTexts improve MTP performance by 1.3x to 3x on complex
benchmarks, match or surpass Prompt Engineering in multiple cases, and reduce developer effort
by nearly 3.8x. These results show that lightweight semantic enrichment is often sufficient to close
most of the performance gap without requiring manual prompt construction.
Through Semantic Engineering, we move toward a new programming paradigm in which
developers express intent once within the code, and systems like MTP translate that intent into
precise and adaptive interactions with LLMs.
This paper makes the following key contributions:
(1) We introduce Semantic Engineering, a paradigm for enriching program semantics so that
LLM-based systems can capture developer intent without relying on manual prompt engineering.
(2) We design Semantic Context Annotations (SemTexts), a language-level mechanism that binds
natural-language intent to arbitrary code entities, and extend the MTP compiler and runtime to
incorporate these annotations into an enriched MT-IR∗and into the prompts generated at runtime.
(3) We introduce a suite of AI-Integrated benchmark applications that more closely resemble
real-world systems than standard benchmarks used in prior works, covering tool use, multi-agent
coordination, planning, and context-dependent workflows.
(4) We conduct an extensive experiments comparing MTP with and without SemTexts against
Prompt Engineering baselines, measuring accuracy, robustness, and developer effort.

4
Dantanarayana et al.

2
MOTIVATION
In this section, we present a motivating example to demonstrate how an AI-Integrated task is
implemented using Prompt Engineering (PE) and how this can be replaced with Meaning-Typed
Programming (MTP). We further illustrate how MTP automatically generates prompts based on
code semantics and examine whether these generated prompts provide sufficient detail compared
to the Prompt Engineering version.

2.1
Case: Planning Agent in an AI-Integrated Code Editor

To ground the discussion, we consider an AI-Integrated code editor powered by an LLM. This system
includes a planning module that automatically generates and executes code modification plans
without direct human intervention. In this section, we take the implementation of this planning
module as our motivating example, demonstrating how such an AI-Integrated component can be
developed.

In this example, the Planning
Module is responsible for gener-
ating a plan that describes how
the code should be modified. Fig-
ure 2 shows the basic data structures
used in this module, along with the
generate_plan function that pro-
duces these plans. To create a plan,
the function takes two inputs: the
task that specifies the desired mod-
ification in the code editor, and a
RepoState object that provides a
snapshot of the current repository for
the Coding Agent. The function then
returns a list[Plan], where each
Plan object identifies the target code element, the action to perform, and any additional parameters
needed to guide the change.
Now let us consider how an LLM can be used to implement generate_plan function using the
Prompt Engineering approach.

1
class Plan:
2
""" Planning Step of Coding Agent """
3
action: str # The specific change or operation to perform
4
category: str # The type of task (e.g., feature, refactor, fix)
5
description: str # Explanation or context for the action
6
file: Optional[str] = None # Target file or module (if applicable)
7
effort: str = "medium" # Estimated effort: low, medium, or high
8
priority: int = 1 # Execution order or importance
9
10
class RepoState:
11
""" Repository State Snapshot for Coding Agent """
12
files: list[str] # All tracked source files in the repository
13
dirty_files: list[str] # Files with uncommitted or unsaved changes
14
lint_issues: list[str] # Files or lines flagged by the linter
15
test_failures: list[str] # Test cases or files that currently fail
16
17
def generate_plan(goal: str, repo_state: RepoState) -> list[Plan]:
18
...

Fig. 2. Data structures for Plan and RepoState, and the
generate_plan function that should returns a list of Plan steps.

2.2
Prompt Engineering Implementation
Figure 3 shows the prompt used in the Prompt Engineering implementation of generate_plan
function. Lines 1–34 of the prompt define the planning agent’s role and specify the expected output
format, while lines 36–70 include task-specific details extracted from the repository state to guide
the required code modifications.
Overall, this prompt exhibits two key characteristics. First, a significant portion of its content
redundantly restates information already encoded in the Plan object such as field names and data
types, so that the LLM can infer the schema from text. Second, some sections of the prompt function
as scaffolding to stabilize model behavior, providing guidance through formatting rules, ordering
constraints, and behavioral hints. While these elements improve consistency, they do not contribute
new semantics to the task itself. Consequently, the prompt becomes lengthy, manually constructed,
and blends genuine task logic with textual control instructions, increasing development overhead
and reducing maintainability.

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
5

1
"""
2
You are an expert software development planning agent.
3
Your task is to read a development goal and its repository context, then produce a precise and actionable execution plan.
4
5
Rules:
6
1. Always prioritize the main user goal as highest priority.
7
2. Break the main goal into clear steps that can be executed independently when possible.
8
3. Use dependencies to order steps when a step requires results from earlier steps.
9
4. Include file targets when relevant, but keep them None if the change is cross cutting or not file specific.
10
5. Use category from {feature, refactor, fix, documentation}.
11
6. Use effort from {low, medium, high}.
12
7. Return only a JSON array of plan objects that follow this schema:
13
14
[
15
{
16
'action': '<short imperative action>',
17
'category': 'feature | refactor | fix | documentation',
18
'description': '<why and how to make the change>',
19
'file': '<path or module, or null>',
20
'effort': 'low | medium | high',
21
'priority': <integer where 1 is highest>
22
}
23
]
24
25
Important:
26
- The main task has priority 1.
27
- Supporting steps that directly enable the main task have priority 2 or 3.
28
- Unrelated fixes or missing files should be lower priority or excluded unless they block the main task.
29
30
MAIN TASK (HIGHEST PRIORITY):
31
Add structured logging to all API handlers and remove duplicated request parsing by refactoring into a shared utility.
32
33
FOCUS:
34
Create a plan that completes the main task first. Use dependencies and ordering to make execution straightforward.
35
36
REPOSITORY CONTEXT:
37
Files being edited or reviewed:
38
- api/handlers.py
39
- api/auth.py
40
- api/utils/__init__.py
41
Referenced but missing files (lower priority unless required for the main task):
42
- api/utils/request_parser.py
43
Repository structure (truncated if large):
44
api/
45
handlers.py
46
auth.py
47
utils/
48
__init__.py
49
tests/
50
test_handlers.py
51
... [truncated]
52
Git dirty files:
53
- api/handlers.py
54
55
EXISTING ISSUES (address only if they block the main task):
56
- LINT: Linting issues found in api/handlers.py
57
Details: F401 unused import, E302 expected 2 blank lines, found 1
58
- TEST: Test failures detected
59
Details: FAIL: test_request_parsing_roundtrip in tests/test_handlers.py ... [truncated]
60
61
REQUIREMENTS:
62
1. Priority 1 items must directly complete or unlock the main task.
63
2. Break the main task into specific, implementable actions.
64
3. Only include existing issue fixes if they directly block the main task.
65
4. Use dependencies to enforce correct ordering when needed.
66
5. If a step targets a specific file, set file to that path, otherwise set it to null.
67
6. Be concise and specific in action and description.
68
69
Return only the JSON array of plan objects that match the schema.
70
"""

Fig. 3. Prompt Engineering implementation showing the full concatenated prompt used by the
generate_plan function.

2.3
MTP Implementation

To overcome the complexities of Prompt Engineering, Figure 4a illustrates how MTP [7] implements
generate_plan function and constructs corresponding prompt automatically. In this approach,
the developer simply annotates the function with by llm. When by call site is encountered,
MTP performs static analysis during compilation and extracts the semantics needed for prompt
generation, including the function signature, argument types (string and RepoState), and the
return type list[Plan]. These details are captured in the MT-IR (Figure 4b), an intermediate
representation that encodes these details. At runtime, MTP uses MT-IR to automatically generate a
prompt for generate_plan, ensuring structured and consistent output generation as in Figure 4c.

6
Dantanarayana et al.

1
def generate_plan(goal: str, repo_state: RepoState) -> list[Plan] by llm

(a) by keyword annotated function definition that signify MTP system to AI-Integrate.

MT-IR

genar at e_pl an

cl ass

st r
act i on

cl ass

Inputs

cat egor y

st r

st r
goal

f i l es

st r
l i st

descr i pt i on

st r

Outputs

r epo_st at e

RepoSt at e

di r t y_f i l es

st r
l i st

f i l e

st r

l i nt _i ssues

st r
l i st

ef f or t

st r

t est _f ai l ur es

st r
l i st

pr i or i t y

i nt

(b) The extracted semantics are captured in the Meaning-Typed Intermediate Representation (MT-IR).

1
"""
2
[System Prompt]
3
This is an operation you must perform and return the output values.
4
Follow the provided Input, Output, and Type information.
5
Do not explain. Do not add commentary. Return only the output value(s).
6
7
[Inputs_Information]
8
(goal) (str) = 'Add structured logging to all API handlers and refactor duplicated request parsing into a shared utility.'
9
(repo_state) (RepoState) = RepoState(
10
files = ['api/handlers.py', 'api/auth.py', 'api/utils/__init__.py'],
11
dirty_files = ['api/handlers.py'],
12
lint_issues = ['Unused import in api/handlers.py'],
13
test_failures = ['tests/test_handlers.py::test_logging_roundtrip failed']
14
)
15
16
[Output_Information]
17
(list[Plan])
18
19
[Type_Explanations]
20
(Plan) (obj) eg: Plan(
21
action = str,
22
category = str,
23
description = str,
24
file = Optional[str],
25
effort = str,
26
priority = int
27
)
28
29
(RepoState) (obj) eg: RepoState(
30
files = list[str],
31
dirty_files = list[str],
32
lint_issues = list[str],
33
test_failures = list[str]
34
)
35
36
[Action]
37
generate_plan
38
39
Generate and return the output result(s) only, adhering to the provided Type in the following format
40
41
[Output]
42
<result>
43
"""

(c) MTP generated prompt.

Fig. 4. MTP implementation of the generate_plan function and the automatic prompt generation derived
from its semantic structure.

2.4
Manually Crafted Prompts vs. MTP Auto Prompts
Comparing the manually crafted prompt in Figure 3 with the automatically generated one in
Figure 4c shows that several important semantic cues are missing in the prompt generated by MTP.
For example, the manual prompt explicitly defines task priorities (Lines 25–29) and dependency

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
7

ordering (Line 34), helping the LLM reason more effectively. It also specifies effort levels and
task categories such as feature, fix, and documentation (Line 17), which guide the model toward
consistent outputs. However, these details are not present in the portions of the source code
relevant to the given by call site and therefore cannot be extracted as meaningful semantics during
static analysis. As a result, this information is absent from the MT-IR and consequently from the
automatically generated prompt.
This limitation highlights an important challenge: MTP relies solely on the semantics that already
exist in the code, and only those within the context relevant to a given by call site are captured in
the MT-IR. As a result, any contextual or organizational knowledge that lies outside this scope is
excluded from the prompt generation process. Although Prompt Engineering could restore much
of this missing context, it would also reintroduce significant developer overhead as discussed in
Section 2.2. To bridge this gap, we need a way to enrich the code with additional semantics so
that the MT-IR can convey more complete contextual information. By embedding complementary
semantics directly into the program, we can improve MTP prompt quality while avoiding the heavy
manual work of Prompt Engineering. The goal is to strike a balance between manual prompt design
and fully automatic prompt generation through lightweight semantic annotations that enhance
MTP with minimal developer effort.

3
Semantic Engineering
Building on this motivation, we introduce the concept of Semantic Engineering, a technique for
guiding LLMs by engineering code semantics rather than crafting manual prompts. Semantic
Engineering aims to strike a balance between detailed Prompt Engineering and purely automatic
prompt generation based on existing code semantics. Instead of embedding explicit textual instruc-
tions for the model, Semantic Engineering refines the MT-IR to make the meaning of each code
construct more precise and expressive. By making these semantics explicit, Semantic Engineering
enables MTP to generate richer and more context-aware prompts, allowing LLMs to better capture
developer intent and reason about program behavior.

3.1
Methods for Semantic Engineering

Code semantics can be enriched in two main ways.
(1) By modifying the code itself. Developers can express additional semantics directly through
the code itself. For instance, to add missing semantics as discussed in §2.4, one could define an
enumeration class to explicitly represent task categories such as feature, fix, or documentation.
While this approach can make certain semantics explicit, it also alters the original code structure
and may require corresponding changes in other code components that depend on it. This process
increases code complexity, adds developer overhead, and still risks overlooking semantics that are
difficult to encode directly in code.
(2) By adding natural language annotations. Semantics can also be enriched through annota-
tions that describe the intent and behavior of code elements. This approach is already common in
practice through comments and docstrings that improve readability and maintainability. It requires
minimal code modification and therefore reduces developer effort and complexity. In this paper, we
primarily focus on this second method of semantic enrichment through annotation and explore
how to make this process easier and more effective for developers.
In the context of Semantic Engineering with MTP, these annotations must be structured and
attached to specific code constructs. This allows the system to interpret them as formal semantics
during compiler analysis. The enriched information then becomes part of the MT-IR, contributing
to the generation of richer, more accurate, and contextually meaningful prompts.

8
Dantanarayana et al.

Next, we examine whether existing annotation mechanisms such as comments and docstrings
can be directly utilized as methods for Semantic Engineering within MTP, or whether we need an
alternative to effectively convey semantics to the MT-IR.

3.1.1
Comments. Comments are one of the most common mechanisms used to improve code
readability. They allow developers to describe the intent and behavior behind code constructs.
However, comments have significant limitations in the context of Semantic Engineering. They
are not always structured or precise, and they often contain unrelated information meant for
human readers rather than meaningful semantic intent. Since comments are not syntactically or
semantically bound to specific program elements, there is no reliable way to associate them with
the constructs they are meant to describe. As a result, comments cannot provide the consistent and
interpretable semantics required for automated reasoning or prompt generation.

3.1.2
Docstrings. Docstrings provide a more structured way to embed semantics within code.
In many programming languages, they are used to document functions, classes, and methods.
Unlike comments, docstrings are syntactically associated with specific code entities and can be
retrieved during compilation. This explicit association allows docstrings to be captured and linked
within the MT-IR, making them suitable for Semantic Engineering. However, docstrings also have
limitations. They must be defined at the declaration site of an entity, which restricts where semantic
information can be attached. In addition, docstrings cannot be applied to all entities, such as
individual parameters or class attributes, both of which may carry important semantic meaning.
These constraints make docstrings a useful but somewhat inflexible mechanism for Semantic
Engineering.
In addition to these structural limitations, both comments and docstrings already play established
roles in software development, such as documentation, usage guidance, or notes for future work.
Using them to carry semantic intent would mix documentation with program meaning and blur
their intended purpose. This reinforces the need for a dedicated mechanism designed specifically
for Semantic Engineering, one that conveys precise intent without interfering with conventional
documentation practices.

3.2
Design Principles for a Semantic Engineering Method
From the limitations of comments and docstrings, we derive key requirements for an effective
Semantic Engineering method that enables richer MT-IR construction within MTP. An ideal method
should:

(1) Bind to any code entity, enabling semantic enrichment at all levels (class, method, param-
eter, attribute, etc.).
(2) Be applicable anywhere in the source code, without placement restrictions.
(3) Impose minimal developer effort, relying on simple, lightweight annotations rather
than complex or verbose syntax.

A method that satisfies these principles can consistently supply semantic cues to the MT-IR
without disrupting normal development workflows.

4
Semantic Engineering with SemTexts
Following the design principles established in §3.2, we introduce Semantic Context Annotations
(SemText), a language-level mechanism for Semantic Engineering that provides a controlled manner
to enrich any code constructs with natural-language semantics. SemTexts allow developers to
explicitly embed intent and contextual meaning directly into the program, enabling the compiler
and runtime to incorporate this information during prompt construction in MTP.

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
9

Persist

at
Runtime

SemTabl e

SymTabl e

Runt i me

MT-IR*

M

M

M

MT-IR*

byt ecode

Source

SemTable Build Pass

Code
AST + SymTable Genaration

Codegen

Enriched MT-IR Construction

semantic

T
T

meaning

'by' abstraction

T
T

T

MT-Runtime

value
bindings

T
T

LLM

'by' definition

SemText

for each by call-site

@ Runtime

for each SemText

If not
pr i mi t i ve

for each code entity

t ype?
Yes

Enriched Semantics

Code Entity
SemText

No
Append

Semantic

Code
Entity

SemTabl e

MT-IR

Semantic

Context
Code
Entity

Semantic

Context
Code
Entity

MT-IR*

Context

SemText
MTP

Type

SymTabl e

SemTabl e

" " " Pr ompt
. . .

MT-IR
Code
Entity

Entry
Lookup( )

SemTable

SymTable

Lookup( )

Entry

Code Entity 1
Semantic Context 1

+

Code Entity 2
Semantic Context 2

SemText

. . .
" " "

Augment

Fig. 5. End-to-end compilation pipeline and runtime system for performing Semantic Engineering using
SemTexts in MTP.

4.1
Overview

SemTexts extend MTP by providing a systematic way to attach natural language semantic descrip-
tions to various code constructs, including functions, classes, attributes, parameters, methods, and
even local variables. They participate directly in the compilation pipeline and influence the prompts
automatically generated by MTP for downstream interactions with LLMs.
The core mechanism is simple: developers use the sem keyword to bind a semantic description
to a target code element, and the compiler integrates this information into the enriched prompt
context. For example:

1
class Plan:
2
action: str
3
priority: int
4
5
sem Plan = "A structured execution plan for code modifications"
6
sem Plan.priority = "Priority Order 1 (main), 2-3 (suppportive), 4(misc)"

Lines 5–6 illustrate two SemTexts enriching the Plan class and one of its attributes. Whenever
the MTP system generates a prompt that references Plan class, these semantic annotations are
incorporated automatically alongside the structural type information, supplying the LLM with
more precise contextual cues.
Figure 5 presents the overall MTP compilation and runtime pipeline and illustrates how SemTexts
are incorporated into the system. After the program passes through the traditional front-end phases
that produce the AST and symbol table, system performs two additional compilation passes: (1)
a SemTable construction pass, which associates each SemText with its corresponding code entity
via symbol-table analysis (shown in green), and (2) an MT-IR construction pass, which builds a
semantically enriched MT-IR∗by integrating the recorded SemTexts into the structural MT-IR
(shown in blue). Finally, the MTP runtime is extended to consume the enriched MT-IR∗and use
its semantic context to generate more informative and context-aware prompts for the underlying
LLM. This pipeline is further discussed in the following sections.

10
Dantanarayana et al.

4.2
Syntax of SemTexts
To introduce SemTexts, we add a new keyword, sem, whose syntax is defined by the following
production rule:
𝑆→sem 𝑇= 𝑄
(1)
Here, 𝑆denotes a SemText declaration,𝑇is the target code entity being annotated, and 𝑄is a string
literal describing its semantic meaning.
A SemText may target any named program entity. Formally, let C denote the set of all annotatable
constructs, including functions 𝑓∈F , their parameters 𝑝∈P(𝑓), classes 𝐶∈CL, class attributes
𝑎∈A(𝐶), methods 𝑚∈M(𝐶), method parameters 𝑚𝑝∈MP(𝑚), and local or global variables
𝑣∈V. Here, P(𝑓) denotes the parameters of function 𝑓, A(𝐶) the attributes of class 𝐶, M(𝐶) the
methods of 𝐶, and MP(𝑚) the parameters of method 𝑚.

4.3
Compilation Pipeline for MT-IR Construction with SemTexts

SemTexts are incorporated into the MTP compilation pipeline through a dedicated extraction pass
that enriches the symbol table with semantic context. The resulting SemTable is later consumed
during MT-IR construction and ultimately influences prompt generation at runtime (Figure 5). The
extraction process proceeds in two phases.

4.3.1
SemTable Build Pass. After traditional semantic analysis, the compiler produces an Abstract
Syntax Tree (AST) and an initial symbol table recording all identifiers, their types, and the program’s
type hierarchy. We denote this table as SymTable.
The goal of the SemTable Build Pass is to construct an enriched symbol table, SemTable, that
associates each code entity with any SemText annotations declared in the program. The pass
initializes SemTable as a copy of SymTable and then performs a depth-first traversal of the AST.
Whenever the traversal encounters a SemText declaration of the form sem 𝑇= 𝑄, the compiler
resolves 𝑇to its corresponding program entity using the current scope and attaches the semantic
description 𝑄to that entity’s entry in SemTable. Algorithm 1 formally describes this process.

Algorithm 1: BuildSemTable

Input: AST root node 𝑟, symbol table SymTable
Output: SemTable Σ

1 Σ ←SymTable;
// initialize SemTable as a copy of SymTable

2 foreach node 𝑛in depth-first traversal of AST rooted at 𝑟do

3
if 𝑛is a sem declaration “sem 𝑇= 𝑄” then

4
𝑠←ScopeOf(𝑛);

5
𝑐←Lookup(𝑇,𝑠, Σ);

6
Σ[𝑐].semtext ←𝑄;
// attach SemText to the symbol-table entry

7 return Σ;

In Algorithm 1, the lookup operation Lookup(𝑇,𝑠, Σ) resolves the identifier path 𝑇to a program
entity 𝑐∈C using the current scope 𝑠and the already enriched table Σ. Because Σ is updated in
place as SemTexts are discovered, it always reflects the most current semantic information. As
a result, later compilation stages can use the same resolution mechanism without requiring any
additional handling for SemTexts.

4.3.2
MT-IR Construction with SemTexts. The Meaning-Type Intermediate Representation (MT-IR)
serves as the bridge between the program’s static structure and the prompt context used at runtime.
In base MTP [7], MT-IR captures structural semantics such as function signatures, type information,

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
11

Algorithm 2: ConstructEnrichedMTIR

Input: by call-site 𝑓, SemTable Σ
Output: Enriched MT-IR∗(𝑓)
// Extract function signature

1 N ←name(𝑓);

2 Tin ←{(𝑝, type(𝑝)) | 𝑝∈parameters(𝑓)};

3 Tout ←return_type(𝑓);

4 𝑠←ScopeOf(𝑓);

// Build hierarchical map by expanding non-primitive types

5 H ←∅;

6 worklist ←{type(𝑝) | 𝑝∈parameters(𝑓)} ∪{Tout};

7 visited ←∅;

8 while worklist ≠∅do

9
𝑇←worklist.Pop();

10
if 𝑇is a primitive type or 𝑇∈visited then

11
continue

12
visited ←visited ∪{𝑇};

13
if 𝑇is a class type then

14
H[𝑇] ←{(𝑎, type(𝑎)) | 𝑎∈A(𝑇)};

15
worklist ←worklist ∪{type(𝑎) | 𝑎∈A(𝑇)};

16
else if 𝑇is a generic type then

17
H[𝑇] ←{𝑇𝑝| 𝑇𝑝∈type_parameters(𝑇)};

18
worklist ←worklist ∪{𝑇𝑝| 𝑇𝑝∈type_parameters(𝑇)};

// Enrich all entities with SemTexts using Lookup

19 N∗←(N, Lookup(𝑓,𝑠, Σ).semtext);

20 T∗
in ←{((𝑝, Lookup(𝑝,𝑠, Σ).semtext),𝑇𝑝) | (𝑝,𝑇𝑝) ∈Tin};

21 T∗
out ←(Tout, Lookup(Tout,𝑠, Σ).semtext);

22 H∗←∅;

23 foreach 𝑇∈keys(H) do

24
𝑇∗←(𝑇, Lookup(𝑇,𝑠, Σ).semtext);

25
H∗[𝑇∗] ←{((𝑐, Lookup(𝑐,𝑠, Σ).semtext),𝑇𝑐) | (𝑐,𝑇𝑐) ∈H[𝑇]};

26 return ⟨N∗, T∗
in, T∗
out, H∗⟩;

and the hierarchical decomposition of complex types. SemTexts extend this representation by
injecting developer-provided semantic context into all relevant program entities, producing an
enriched MT-IR. This subsection formalizes both representations and describes how SemTexts are
incorporated during construction.

Base MT-IR. For a by-annotated code construct 𝑓, the base MT-IR captures the structural
semantics that MTP provides to the LLM. It represents the code construct semantics and the
reachable type structure using:

MT-IR(𝑓) = ⟨N, Tin, Tout, H⟩
(2)

• N is the function or method name.
• Tin maps parameters to declared types.
• Tout is the return type.
• H is a hierarchical map expanding the structure of all non-primitive types.

12
Dantanarayana et al.

The hierarchy map is defined recursively:

{(𝑎1,𝑇1), . . . , (𝑎𝑛,𝑇𝑛)}
𝑇is a class with attributes 𝑎𝑖: 𝑇𝑖
{𝑇1, . . . ,𝑇𝑘}
𝑇is a generic type with parameters 𝑇𝑖
∅
𝑇is primitive
(3)




H [𝑇] =

Algorithmically (Phase 1), the base MT-IR corresponds exactly to the first half of Algorithm 2.
The algorithm begins by extracting the function signature (Lines 1–4) and initializing a worklist
with all input and output types (Line 9). It repeatedly pops a type from the worklist, skips primitives
or previously visited types (Lines 11–13), and, if the type is a class or generic, records its structural
expansion in H (Lines 15– 23). Any newly discovered types are added back into the worklist. This
continues until the structure of every reachable type has been recorded.
This produces the complete structural MT-IR that will later be enriched with SemTexts.

Enriched MT-IR. SemTexts extend the base MT-IR with developer-authored natural-language
descriptions. Every entity that appears in the base MT-IR which contains function name, parameters,
return type, classes, attributes, and generic parameters may have an associated SemText stored in
the SemTable.
The enriched MT-IR for a code construct 𝑓is:

MT-IR∗(𝑓) = ⟨N ⊕Σ, Tin ⊕Σ, Tout ⊕Σ, H ⊕Σ⟩
(4)

Here, ⊕Σ denotes augmentation with SemTexts retrieved from the SemTable via Lookup. If no
SemText is defined for an entity, the value ⊥is used to denote the absence of semantic context.
Algorithmically (Phase 2), enrichment corresponds to the second half of Algorithm 2. After
constructing the base MT-IR, the algorithm traverses each of its components and queries the
SemTable to attach semantic context. The function name is paired with its SemText (Line 26);
each parameter in Tin is enriched using the SemTexts of both the parameter and its declared type
(Line 27); the return type is augmented in the same manner (Line 28); and, finally, every type
𝑇appearing in the hierarchy map, along with each of its members in H [𝑇], is annotated using
SemTexts obtained via Lookup (Lines 31–33). This completes the construction of the enriched
MT-IR∗.
The resulting MT-IR∗preserves the structural precision of the base MT-IR but overlays it with
developer intent, enabling MTP to produce prompts that are both structurally grounded and
semantically informative.

4.4
Extending MT-Runtime for SemText Inclusion in Prompts

The MT-Runtime is responsible for converting an MT-IR into an executable prompt by instantiating
the prompt template with the structural information extracted during compilation, as illustrated
in Figures 4b and 4c. With the introduction of SemTexts, the MT-Runtime must be extended to
ensure that the additional semantic context captured in the enriched MT-IR∗is reflected in the final
prompt sent to the LLM.
To support SemText inclusion, the runtime updates its prompt assembly phase to place each
semantic annotation alongside the structural information of the corresponding code entity. As
shown in the bottom-right region of Figure 5, whenever the runtime injects the structural semantics
of a code entity into the prompt, it now also inserts the associated SemText at the same location. This
design preserves spatial affinity between each code entity and its semantic description, ensuring
that the LLM encounters the structural and semantic signals as a coherent unit.

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
13

In Section 5.4, we empirically demonstrate that maintaining this spatial affinity significantly
improves the model’s ability to infer developer intent and produce more semantically aligned
behavior.

4.5
Implementation
MTP is implemented in the Jac programming language, a production-grade superset of Python
that transpiles to Python bytecode. The original MTP system is built on top of Jac’s compiler and
runtime stack [10, 18]. We extend this implementation to support SemTexts through the following
modifications:

(1) Extend the Jac language syntax to introduce the sem keyword.
(2) Modify the parser to recognize SemText declarations and attach them to the corresponding
AST nodes.
(3) Add two new compiler passes, executed after symbol-table construction, to (a) build the
SemTable and (b) construct the enriched MT-IR∗.
(4) Extend the MT-IR data structure to store additional semantic context alongside structural
type information.
(5) Modify the MT-Runtime to incorporate SemTexts during prompt assembly, ensuring that
semantic annotations appear in the final prompt.

These extensions integrate seamlessly into the existing MTP infrastructure, enabling full Semantic
Engineering support. We evaluate the effectiveness of this enriched pipeline in the next section.

5
Evaluation

We evaluate our proposed approach, MTP enhanced with SemTexts as Semantic Engineering method,
across several benchmark AI-Integrated applications. The goal of this evaluation is to assess how
effectively SemTexts enrich program semantics and improve LLM-driven behavior compared to
existing methods. Specifically, we aim to answer the following research questions:

RQ1 - How does MTP enhanced with SemTexts perform relative to Prompt Engineering
baselines in terms of accuracy and consistency?
RQ2 - What is the developer overhead associated with creating SemTexts to achieve com-
parable performance to Prompt Engineering?
RQ3 - Where should SemTexts be inserted and what level of semantic detail should they
encode to provide the most effective guidance to the LLMs?
RQ4 - How effective are traditional annotation mechanisms such as comments and doc-
strings as Semantic Engineering methods compared to SemTexts in expressing devel-
oper intent to MTP?

Experimental Setup. To evaluate the effectiveness of SemTexts, we implemented our approach
within the Jac programming environment (which is a superset of Python) [16–18], extending the
MTP runtime with our Semantic Engineering pipeline. We conduct our experiments using OpenAI
APIs for GPT-4o model, while hosting Gemma3:27b model on a local server equipped with an
NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB VRAM) and 64 GB RAM.

Baselines. We compare our approach against two primary baselines: (1) traditional Prompt
Engineering (PE) and (2) standard MTP without SemTexts, which relies solely on code semantics
for prompt generation. For RQ4, we additionally include variants that use docstrings as Semantic
Engineering method to measure their relative effectiveness.

14
Dantanarayana et al.

Table 1. Summary of benchmark applications, datasets, evaluation methodology, and key AI-Integrated
capabilities. C1–C6 denote core capabilities exercised by each benchmark.

Task Description (with Dataset
used for evaluation)

Evaluation
Methodol-
ogy

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6

Benchmark
Applica-
tion

✓
✓

Retrieve relevant memories from a
user’s personal memory database
given a retrieval query. Dataset: Syn-
thetic dataset of 60 users’ memory
databases with 300 retrieval queries
(5 per user).

F1-Score (overall retrieval
accuracy).

Memory
Retrieval

✓
✓

Extract and describe key visual fea-
tures from images. Dataset: 300 sam-
pled images from LAION-400M [24]
image dataset.

Hybrid metric combining
semantic similarity (co-
sine) and lexical matching
(BM25).

Image
Extraction

✓
✓
✓
✓

LLM as a judge verifies
routing
to
the
correct
agent and response valid-
ity; a task is successful
only if both pass.

Task
Manager

Manage conversational task creation,
summarization, and email drafting.
Dataset: Custom synthetic dataset of
220 queries across three interaction
types including task handling, task
summarization, and email composi-
tion.

✓
✓
✓
✓

LLM as a judge scoring
word limit (1), relevance
(0–4), coherence (0–5), and
factual correctness (0–5).
Responses scoring ≥11/15
are marked successful.

Content
Creator

Performs end to end writing tasks us-
ing a multi agent workflow with plan-
ning, writing, and reviewing stages.
Dataset: InstructEval dataset [4] with
200 prompts across four writing cate-
gories: informative, professional, argu-
mentative, and creative.

✓
✓
✓
✓

An automatic code editor performs
planning, code generation, and vali-
dation without human interaction in
the loop. Dataset: SWE-bench Lite [9]
with 300 tasks for real GitHub issue
solving across 11 Python repositories.

Aider
Genius

Success is measured by fail
to pass test transitions; a
task is successful only if all
tests pass after fixes.

C1: Multimodal Perception
C2: Tool Use & Integration
C3: Memory & Context Management
C4: Information
Retrieval
C5: Multi-Agent Task
C6: Planning & Reasoning

Benchmark Applications. Prior studies [3, 7, 11] on AI-Integration frameworks have com-
monly relied on benchmarks such as GSM8K [6], a dataset of grade school math problems, and
HotpotQA [30], a question answering dataset focused on multi-hop reasoning.
When we consider complex real world AI-Integrated applications, they exhibit a broader set
of capabilities. These include C1: multimodal perception, C2: dynamic tool use, C3: memory
and context management, C4: information retrieval, C5: multi agent coordination, and
C6: planning and adaptive decision making. Together, these capabilities define the challenges
involved in realistic tasks where agents interact with external tools, process evolving context, and
coordinate actions over multiple steps.
However, benchmarks such as GSM8K and HotpotQA do not represent these capabilities. Their
tasks are fixed, self contained, and do not require interaction, external tools, or extended reasoning.
Although MTP has shown competitive performance on GSM8K [7], such results overlook its
limitations in realistic and interactive contexts that rely on capabilities C1 through C6. To address

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
15

this gap, we introduce a new set of benchmark applications that collectively cover the full range of
capabilities C1 through C6. Table 1 summarizes these applications along with their goals, datasets,
evaluation criteria, and the specific capabilities they cover.

5.1
RQ1: Evaluating MTP with SemTexts against Prompt Engineering Baselines

To address RQ1, we examine the performance of each benchmark application when the MTP frame-
work is enhanced with SemTexts as the Semantic Engineering approach, and compare the results
against the baseline PE implementation. The evaluation spans all benchmark applications, each rep-
resenting distinct AI-Integrated capabilities as summarized in Table 1. We conduct the experiments
using both the GPT-4o and Gemma 3:27B models to assess consistency across architectures.

Table 2 presents the evaluation scores for
each benchmark using the corresponding met-
ric defined, comparing three variants: the base
MTP implementation without SemTexts, MTP
enhanced with SemTexts, and the PE implemen-
tation. Results are reported for both GPT-4o and
Gemma 3:27B. To enable direct comparison, Fig-
ure 6 shows the normalized evaluation scores
across all benchmarks, where each metric is
normalized relative to the PE baseline (PE =
1.0).
Across both models, enhancing MTP with
SemTexts leads to consistent performance im-
provements on nearly all benchmarks, with
gains ranging from 1.3x to 3x over base MTP.
The only exception is the Memory Retrieval
task, where SemTexts offers little to no bene-
fit because the existing code semantics already
provide enough information for MTP to per-
form well, as discussed in Section 5.3.2. The
largest improvements appear in benchmarks that require higher levels of reasoning, planning, and
multi agent coordination, such as Task Manager, Content Creator, and Aider Genius. In these cases,

MTP
MTP + SemText
PE

Normalized Evaluation Score

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

ContentCreator

AiderGenius

ImageExtraction

TaskManager

MemoryRetrieval

Fig. 6. Normalized evaluation scores across benchmark
applications for MTP, MTP with SemTexts, and PE base-
line. Each benchmark’s metric (F1, hybrid similarity,
LLM-judge score, or pass rate) is normalized relative to
PE, which is fixed at 1.0 to show relative performance
improvements. All results were obtained using GPT-4o.

Table 2. Evaluation Scores across Benchmarks and Models for PE, MTP, and MTP+Semantic Engineering.

Benchmark
Metric
Model
PE
MTP
MTP+SemTexts

Memory Retrieval
F1 Score
GPT-4o
0.701
0.704
0.698
Gemma3:27b
0.593
0.554
0.595

Image Extraction
Hybrid Lexical & Semantic Similarity
GPT-4o
0.427
0.284
0.439
Gemma3:27b
0.343
0.269
0.338

Task Manager
Success Rate (%)
GPT-4o
89.546
36.818
92.273
Gemma3:27b
72.727
27.273
68.182

Content Creator
Success Rate (%)
GPT-4o
95.000
32.500
96.000
Gemma3:27b
76.000
20.000
74.500

Aider Genius
Test Passing Rate (%)
GPT-4o
19.667
9.667
18.667
Gemma3:27b
11.333
6.667
10.667

16
Dantanarayana et al.

Semantic Engineering enables the model to better capture developer intent and workflow structure,
resulting in more effective execution of the tasks.
When compared with the PE implementation, the SemTexts-enhanced MTP achieves compa-
rable or slightly better accuracy across all benchmarks. This demonstrates that explicit semantic
enrichment can close much of the performance gap with manually crafted prompts, even in com-
plex, AI-Integrated applications that combine multiple capabilities such as tool use, planning, and
coordination.

Key Takeaways:

(1) SemTexts enhance MTP performance: Integrating SemTexts improves the accuracy and
consistency of MTP across most benchmarks, particularly in tasks that require reasoning,
planning, and multi-agent coordination.
(2) Semantic Engineering as a practical alternative to PE: Enhancing MTP with SemTexts
enables performance comparable to or better than PE, making Semantic Engineering a
scalable and less manual alternative even for complex AI-Integrated applications.

5.2
RQ2: Evaluating the Developer Overhead of Adding SemTexts Compared to Prompt
Engineering

To address RQ2, we evaluate the developer overhead involved in integrating LLM-based functional-
ity into traditional software systems that initially lack any LLM features. To quantify this overhead,
we conduct a quantitative analysis measuring the number of Lines of Code (LOC) that must be
added or modified when incorporating LLM capabilities into an existing codebase. Following prior
studies [3, 7], LOC added or modified serves as a practical metric to estimate integration effort
across frameworks.
We measure this LOC overhead across all benchmark applications listed in Table 1 for all the
three implementations: the base MTP without SemTexts, MTP enhanced with SemTexts, and the PE
implementation. Table 3 reports the LOC added or modified for each case, along with the reduction
factor of LOC observed in the MTP-based approaches compared to PE.

As shown in Table 3, both MTP-
based implementations require sig-
nificantly fewer code modifications
compared to the PE implementation.
On average, the base MTP reduces de-
veloper effort by about 8.2x relative
to PE, while the SemTexts-enhanced
version achieves nearly a 3.8x reduc-
tion. Importantly, the additional ef-
fort required to extend the base MTP
implementation with SemTexts as Se-
mantic Engineering method is min-
imal, typically involving only light-
weight semantic annotations rather
than major structural changes. This
contrasts sharply with the PE implementation, which requires extensive manual prompt design and
task specific fine tuning. In practice, integrating SemTexts adds only a small number of annotation
lines per function or module, while PE often requires several orders of magnitude more handcrafted
instructions across tasks.

Table 3. Comparison of developer overhead measured in Lines
of Code (LOC) added or modified during LLM integration for all
benchmark applications along with reduction factors relative to
PE.

Benchmark
PE
MTP
MTP + SemTexts

LOC
LOC↓×
LOC↓×

Memory Retrieval
44
3↓×13.67
5↓×7.80
Image Extraction
126
12↓×9.50
32↓×2.94
Task Manager
119
18↓×5.61
30↓×2.97
Content Creator
127
20↓×5.35
46↓×1.76
Aider Genius
154
20↓×6.70
34↓×3.53

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
17

1
class AgentTypes(Enum):
2
PLANNER_AGENT
3
WRITER_AGENT
4
REVIEW_AGENT
5
END
6
7
class WorkflowStage(Enum):
8
PLANNING
9
WRITING
10
REVIEWING
11
REVISING
12
COMPLETED
13
14
class ReviewResult:
15
is_approved: bool
16
review_comments: str

1
class Supervisor:
2
def call_next_agent(utterance: str, current_state: WorkflowStage) -> AgentTypes by llm
3
4
class PlannerAgent(Agent):
5
def create_content_plan(utterance: str) -> str by llm
6
7
class WriterAgent(Agent):
8
def create_content(utterance: str, plan: str, feedback: str = "") -> str by llm
9
10
class ReviewAgent(Agent):
11
def review_content(content: str, plan: str) -> ReviewResult by llm

(b) Agent behavior definitions

(a) Agent and workflow
type definitions

1
sem AgentTypes.PLANNER_AGENT = "Agent responsible for creating content plans and strategies"
2
sem AgentTypes.WRITER_AGENT = "Agent responsible for writing and revising content based on plans and feedback"
3
sem AgentTypes.REVIEW_AGENT = "Agent responsible for reviewing content quality, word count, and alignment with objectives"
4
sem AgentTypes.END = "Workflow termination - use when content is approved or max revisions reached"
5
6
sem WorkflowStage.PLANNING = "Initial stage - route to PLANNER_AGENT to create content strategy"
7
sem WorkflowStage.WRITING = "Content creation stage - route to WRITER_AGENT to write or revise content"
8
sem WorkflowStage.REVIEWING = "Quality check stage - route to REVIEW_AGENT to evaluate content"
9
sem WorkflowStage.REVISING = "Content rejected and needs rewriting - route to WRITER_AGENT (NOT review agent)"
10
sem WorkflowStage.COMPLETED = "Final stage - route to END to terminate workflow"
11
12
sem ReviewResult.is_approved = "if the content meets the criteria, set to true; otherwise, false"
13
sem ReviewResult.review_comments = "detailed feedback on content quality, clarity, and alignment with plan."

(c) SemText annotations for agent and workflow elements

Fig. 7. Overview of the content generation agent system, showing structure, behavior, and semantic annota-
tions.

Key Takeaways:

(1) Lightweight Semantic Engineering integration: Adding SemTexts requires only a few
concise annotation lines to supply missing semantics to the base MTP implementation,
introducing minimal developer overhead and avoiding extensive code modifications.
(2) High performance with lower developer effort: Semantic Engineering demands signifi-
cantly less developer effort than PE while achieving comparable or even better performance,
making it an efficient and scalable approach for integrating LLM capabilities into software
systems.

5.3
RQ3: Determining the Placement and Granularity of SemTexts
To investigate RQ3, we examined the implementations of our benchmark applications using
MTP and then incrementally applied SemTexts to enrich their semantics, allowing us to observe
the resulting performance improvements. We focus on two primary benchmarks that produced
particularly revealing outcomes and provide strong evidence supporting our analysis.

5.3.1
Case 1: Ablation Study for Content Creator. To determine where SemTexts should be
inserted within the code, we selected the Content Creator benchmark shown in Table 1 for detailed
analysis. We first evaluated the MTP implementation of Content Creator without any SemTexts
and recorded its performance. The baseline MTP version was observed to be 4x times less accurate
than the PE baseline, as illustrated in Figure 8 when evaluated using GPT-4o. This indicates that a
significant portion of the developer’s intent is not fully represented in the code semantics.
Figure 7 presents the overall structure of the application, including all by call-sites. The system
consists of three specialized agents and one supervisory agent (Figure 7b). Two enumeration objects

18
Dantanarayana et al.

are used to manage routing between agents (Figure 7a). To assess whether developer intent is
sufficiently expressed in the code, we examine each by call-site individually.

When analyzing MTP’s failing
cases, we observed that routing er-
rors most often arose when the cur-
rent workflow stage did not align
with the next expected agent type.
To understand this, we examine the
by call site in the Supervisor agent,
which determines the next agent
based on the user input and the cur-
rent WorkflowStage enumeration.
From MTP’s perspective, the avail-
able semantics consist only of the two
enumerations (WorkflowStage and
AgentTypes), the method signature,
and its association with Supervisor.
With such limited context, MTP gen-
erates prompts that provide minimal
guidance, leaving the LLM to infer
agent roles from enumeration names
alone. This leads to workflow ambi-
guity, such as whether planning should be repeated after each revision and whether the revising
stage should return control to the WriterAgent or the PlannerAgent. Adding SemTexts resolves
these issues by clarifying developer intent and making the routing behavior explicit.
Apart from the routing logic, most other by call sites already reflect the intended behavior. The
main exception is the review_content method in the ReviewAgent, where the review criteria are
not mentioned. This gap can be addressed by adding concise SemTexts to the ReviewResults output
type, ensuring that MTP generates prompts that accurately represent the reviewer’s objectives.
Using these observations, we design our ablation study by incrementally introducing SemTexts
in a step-by-step manner.

100

PE

80

Success Rate (%)

60

40

20

MTPbase
Semrouting
Semstage
Semreview
Semall
Semprompt
0

Fig. 8. Ablation study illustrating where SemTexts are inserted
and how their placement affects accuracy. The red line indicates
the success rate achieved by the baseline PE implementation. All
results were obtained using GPT-4o.

(1) MTPbase: Baseline MTP implementation without any SemTexts.
(2) Semrouting: SemTexts added for AgentTypes (Lines 1–4 in Figure 7c) to specify each agent’s
role.
(3) Semstage: SemTexts added for WorkflowStage (Lines 6–10 in Figure 7c) to describe each
workflow stage.
(4) Semreview: SemTexts added for ReviewResult (Line 12-13) on Figure 7c to provide what are
the review criteria.
(5) Semall_entities: SemTexts added for all the entities in the code.
(6) Semprompt: SemTexts added for each function, embedding the same text used in the corre-
sponding system prompt from the PE version.

The experimental results are presented in Figure 8. Notably, adding SemTexts to the AgentTypes
enumeration (Semrouting) required only four concise annotation lines yet nearly doubled the perfor-
mance of MTPbase, reinforcing our earlier observation that the code underrepresented the devel-
oper’s intent. Extending SemTexts to the routing related WorkflowStage enumeration (Semstage)
provided a similar improvement, again with only four additional annotation lines. More broadly,

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
19

these results show that even small, focused natural language annotations can yield substantial
performance gains for MTP.
Adding SemTexts to the ReviewResult class (Semreview) improved accuracy further, though
by a smaller factor of 1.09x. This shows that some SemTexts are more influential than others:
review semantics help, but they are less critical than the routing related annotations. At this point,
the SemText enhanced MTP reaches accuracy comparable to the PE baseline. All of these gains
require only about ten lines of SemTexts, allowing MTP to match PE level performance with far
less developer effort.
The results for Semall and Semprompt further reinforce these observations. Adding SemTexts to
every entity in Semall did not produce a significant performance gain beyond Semreview, indicating
that accuracy does not increase linearly with the number of SemTexts added. The Semprompt version
reduced the accuracy beyond even Semreview. This is because the new prompts include both MT-IR
information and the original prompt (as a SemText), introducing noisy context that makes it harder
for the LLM to correctly associate entities with their relevant contexts.

Key Takeaways: From the ablation study, we derive several key insights that directly address
RQ3 on how SemTexts enhance the representation of developer intent in code.

(1) Filling semantic gaps: SemTexts are most effective in locations where the code lacks
explicit semantics or where the connection between entities is weak, particularly at by
call-sites. These are the points where we should carefully evaluate whether the existing
code semantics are sufficient for the task or if additional SemTexts are needed to better
capture developer intent.
(2) Diminishing returns: Accuracy improvements do not increase linearly with the number
of SemTexts added. Once the key semantic gaps are addressed, further annotations provide
limited or no benefit.
(3) Form and integration matter: SemTexts should not replicate traditional prompts. Embed-
ding long or redundant prompt text can reduce performance by cluttering the MTP context
and weakening associations between related entities.

5.3.2
Case 2: Memory Retrieval Application. For this analysis, we selected the memory re-
trieval benchmark in Table 1. In this case, the MTP variants performed almost the same as the PE
version (Figure 6). This outcome reflects the nature of the task, where both implementations are
straightforward and the developer intent is already clear in the code.
This finding is consistent with the observations of [7], which showed that MTP can effectively
handle straightforward tasks even without explicit semantic enrichment, as long as the developer
intent is sufficiently represented in the code.

Key Takeaway: SemTexts do not always lead to higher accuracy; when the task is straightfor-
ward, most of the necessary semantics are already captured in the code, and the developer’s intent
is sufficiently represented without additional enrichment.

5.4
RQ4: Comparison of SemTexts and Traditional Annotation Mechanisms

As discussed in § 3, existing mechanisms such as comments and docstrings can be used to annotate
code and partially support Semantic Engineering. Docstrings are most aligned with Semantic
Engineering as they specifically document code entities, making them more likely to be used
for annotating code semantics than general comments. To evaluate how well SemTexts perform
compared to docstrings, we implemented another variant of MTP that uses docstrings as contextual
information for functions, classes, and methods.

20
Dantanarayana et al.

1
class AgentTypes(Enum):
2
"""
3
In this Enum:
4
PLANNER_AGENT : Agent responsible for creating content plans and strategies
5
WRITER_AGENT : Agent responsible for writing and revising content based on plans and feedback
6
REVIEW_AGENT : Agent responsible for reviewing content quality, word count, and alignment with objectives
7
END : Workflow termination - use when content is approved or max revisions reached
8
"""
9
10
PLANNER_AGENT
11
WRITER_AGENT
12
REVIEW_AGENT
13
END

Fig. 9. Docstring-based representation of semantics for AgentTypes.

To evaluate this, we applied the
docstrings-based variant to the Con-
tent Creator and Task Manager ap-
plications in our benchmark suite.
These applications contain multi-
ple SemTexts bound to different at-
tributes of the same entities, making
them suitable candidates for a doc-
string substitution. In this setup, each SemText was rewritten as a corresponding docstring. Figure 9
illustrates this approach using the same example shown earlier in Figure 7. Using this method, we
applied equivalent semantic annotations to all functions, classes, and methods. In theory, both im-
plementations convey the same information. However, when comparing their accuracy on the Task
Manager and Content Creator benchmarks shown in Table 4, the SemTexts version consistently
outperformed the docstring version by 7% for Content Creator and 8% for Task Manager.
The difference arises from how MTP extracts and positions semantic context in the prompt.
In the docstring approach, the entire comment is captured as a single block associated with the
class definition in the MT-IR. This means the semantic context must appear either before or after
the class definition, creating a nonzero token distance between each entity and its meaning, in
the prompt. In contrast, SemTexts can be attached directly to individual attributes or methods as
separate strings, allowing the context to appear immediately next to the relevant entity. This spatial
affinity enables the LLM to interpret the semantics more precisely, improving reasoning and overall
accuracy.

Table 4. Success Rate (%) for MTP, MTP+Docstring, and
MTP+Semantic Engineering on Content Creator and Task Man-
ager benchmarks. Results were obtained using GPT-4o.

Benchmark
MTP
MTP+Docstring
MTP+SemText

Content Creator
32.000
88.000
96.000
Task Manager
35.818
85.670
92.270

Key Takeaways: This study highlights two key insights:

(1) SemTexts provide finer grained control of semantics than docstrings, enabling more effective
prompt generation.
(2) High spatial affinity between semantic context and its corresponding entity in the prompt
significantly improves accuracy.

6
Related Work
A wide range of frameworks have been proposed for integrating LLMs into software systems.
Broadly, these systems fall into two categories: (1) generating executable code at runtime [13, 20],
and (2) invoking LLMs as runtime components to directly produce values. Our work belongs to the
latter category, alongside DSPy [11], MTP [7], LMQL [3], and SGLang [31].
LMQL [3] and SGLang [31] focus on constrained generation and efficient inference, respectively.
While these systems reduce certain aspects of prompt-engineering overhead, they still fundamen-
tally rely on manually authored prompts. Similarly, there exist many developer tools [2, 5, 8, 12, 15,
19, 21, 27] to streamline prompt construction but do not eliminate manual prompt crafting.

Prompt Less, Smile More: MTP with Semantic Engineering in Lieu of Prompt Engineering
21

Our work instead targets automated prompt generation and how to improve its performance
without increasing developer effort. DSPy [11] and MTP [7] represent two major steps in this direc-
tion. DSPy substantially reduces prompt engineering but still imposes notable developer overhead
compared to MTP, as it does not leverage automated semantic extraction. MTP demonstrates equal
or better accuracy than DSPy while requiring roughly an order of magnitude less developer input,
which is why we build on MTP as the state-of-the-art.
Other related efforts explore prompt optimization techniques built on DSPy, such as GEPA [1],
which performs evolutionary search over prompt candidates. Our approach differs in that we
enhance prompt semantics through lightweight semantic enrichment rather than optimizing
prompts after they are written.
Also, prior work has examined automatic generation of docstrings for documentation [22, 29].
However, as demonstrated in our evaluation, docstrings are too coarse-grained to serve as effective
semantic carriers for automated prompt construction.

7
Conclusion
AI-Integrated applications increasingly rely on LLMs for perception, decision making, and multi
step workflows, yet incorporating implicit developer intent into these systems remains a major
challenge. This paper introduced Semantic Engineering and SemTexts as a lightweight mechanism
for enriching MTP with explicit semantic context. By embedding complementary semantics directly
into code constructs, SemTexts allow MTP to generate more accurate and context aware prompts
without the need for manual Prompt Engineering. Our evaluation across diverse benchmarks shows
that SemTexts significantly improve MTP performance, often matching or surpassing traditional
Prompt Engineering while requiring far less developer effort. These results demonstrate that
Semantic Engineering provides a practical and scalable path toward building reliable AI-Integrated
applications with clear, maintainable, and intent aligned code. Future work includes developing
automated tooling for SemText suggestion and optimization, further reducing developer effort
while maintaining high performance.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb
Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein,
Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2025. GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can Outperform Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv:2507.19457 [cs.CL]
[2] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Developer Platform — API. Accessed: 2025-11-13.
[3] Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. 2023. Prompting Is Programming: A Query Language for Large
Language Models. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, PLDI, Article 186 (June 2023), 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3591300
[4] Yew Ken Chia, Pengfei Hong, Lidong Bing, and Soujanya Poria. 2023. INSTRUCTEVAL: Towards Holistic Evaluation
of Instruction-Tuned Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04757 (2023).
[5] Chroma. 2025. Introduction — Chroma Docs. Web page.

Accessed: 2025-11-14.
[6] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry
Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training Verifiers to Solve
Math Word Problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 (2021).
[7] Jayanaka L. Dantanarayana, Yiping Kang, Kugesan Sivasothynathan, Christopher Clarke, Baichuan Li, Savini Kashmira,
Krisztian Flautner, Lingjia Tang, and Jason Mars. 2025. MTP: A Meaning-Typed Language Abstraction for AI-Integrated
Programming. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, OOPSLA2, Article 314 (Oct. 2025), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3763092
[8] Fiddler AI. 2025. Fiddler AI – AI Observability & Model Monitoring Platform. Web page.

Accessed: 2025-11-14.
[9] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024.
SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on

22
Dantanarayana et al.

Learning Representations.
[10] Savini Kashmira, Jayanaka Dantanarayana, Thamirawaran Sathiyalogeswaran, Yichao Yuan, Nishil Talati, Krisztian
Flautner, Lingjia Tang, and Jason Mars. 2025. GraphMend: Code Transformations for Fixing Graph Breaks in PyTorch
2. arXiv:2509.16248 [cs.PL]
[11] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful
Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts.
2023. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines. arXiv:2310.03714 [cs.CL]

[12] Langchain. 2025. Langchain. Accessed: 2025-11-12.
[13] Kyla H. Levin, Kyle Gwilt, Emery D. Berger, and Stephen N. Freund. 2025. Effective LLM-Driven Code Generation
with Pythoness. arXiv:2501.02138 [cs.PL]
[14] Ziyang Li, Jiani Huang, and Mayur Naik. 2023. Scallop: A Language for Neurosymbolic Programming. Proc. ACM
Program. Lang. 7, PLDI, Article 166 (June 2023), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3591280
[15] Jerry Liu. 2022. LlamaIndex.
[16] Jason Mars. 2025. Extending Data Spatial Semantics for Scale Agnostic Programming. arXiv:2504.03109 [cs.PL]

[17] Jason Mars. 2025. Object-Spatial Programming. arXiv:2503.15812 [cs.PL]
[18] Jason Mars, Yiping Kang, Roland Daynauth, Baichuan Li, Ashish Mahendra, Krisztian Flautner, and Lingjia Tang. 2023.
The Jaseci Programming Paradigm and Runtime Stack: Building Scale-Out Production Applications Easy and Fast.
IEEE Computer Architecture Letters 22, 2 (2023), 101–104. doi:10.1109/LCA.2023.3274038
[19] Microsoft. [n. d.]. TypeChat: Helps get well-typed responses from language models to build pragmatic natural language
interfaces. Accessed: 2025-08-21.
[20] Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Hao Wang, Koushik Sen, Dawn Song, and Martin Vechev. 2025. Type-Constrained
Code Generation with Language Models. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, PLDI, Article 171 (June 2025), 26 pages.
doi:10.1145/3729274
[21] OpenAI. 2025. API Platform | OpenAI. Web page. Accessed: 2025-11-13.
[22] Bibek Poudel, Adam Cook, Sekou Traore, and Shelah Ameli. 2024. DocuMint: Docstring Generation for Python using
Small Language Models. arXiv:2405.10243 [cs.SE]
[23] Pranab Sahoo, Ayush Kumar Singh, Sriparna Saha, Vinija Jain, Samrat Mondal, and Aman Chadha. 2025. A Systematic
Survey of Prompt Engineering in Large Language Models: Techniques and Applications. arXiv:2402.07927 [cs.AI]

[24] Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton Mullis, Aarush Katta, Theo
Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. 2021. LAION-400M: Open Dataset of CLIP-Filtered 400 Million
Image-Text Pairs. arXiv:2111.02114 [cs.CV]
[25] Reshabh K Sharma, Jonathan De Halleux, Shraddha Barke, and Benjamin Zorn. 2025. PromptPex: Automatic Test
Generation for Language Model Prompts. arXiv:2503.05070 [cs.SE]
[26] Irene Weber. 2024. Large Language Models as Software Components: A Taxonomy for LLM-Integrated Applications.
arXiv:2406.10300 [cs.SE]
[27] Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. 2023.
Efficient Guided Generation for Large Language Models.
(2023).
arXiv:2307.09702 [cs.CL]
[28] x1xhlol and Lucas Valbuena. 2025. System Prompts and Models of AI Tools.
and-models-of-ai-tools Repository of system prompts, internal tools, and AI models from 30+ AI development
platforms.
[29] Dayu Yang, Antoine Simoulin, Xin Qian, Xiaoyi Liu, Yuwei Cao, Zhaopu Teng, and Grey Yang. 2025. DocAgent: A
Multi-Agent System for Automated Code Documentation Generation. arXiv:2504.08725 [cs.SE]
2504.08725
[30] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A Dataset for Diverse, Explainable Multi-hop Question Answering. In Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
[31] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis,
Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: Efficient Execution of Structured
Language Model Programs. arXiv:2312.07104 [cs.AI]