Physics-Informed Machine Learning for
Transformer Condition Monitoring – Part II:
Physics-Informed Neural Networks and
Uncertainty Quantification

Jose I. Aizpurua, Senior Member, IEEE

arXiv:2512.22189v1 [cs.LG] 20 Dec 2025

paper focuses on PINNs for transformer applications,
and extends them to uncertainty quantification via
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs).

Abstract—The integration of physics-based knowledge
with machine learning models is increasingly shaping
the monitoring, diagnostics, and prognostics of electrical
transformers. In this two-part series, the first paper in-
troduced the foundations of Neural Networks (NNs) and
their variants for health assessment tasks. This second
paper focuses on integrating physics and uncertainty into
the learning process. We begin with the fundamentals
of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs), applied
to spatiotemporal thermal modeling and solid insulation
ageing. Building on this, we present Bayesian PINNs as
a principled framework to quantify epistemic uncertainty
and deliver robust predictions under sparse data. Finally,
we outline emerging research directions that highlight
the potential of physics-aware and trustworthy machine
learning for critical power assets.

PINNs enhance conventional NNs by embedding
physics-based models directly into the learning pro-
cess [1]. Unlike traditional hybrid approaches that
integrate physics-based and data-driven models in
series or parallel configurations [2], such as error-
correction models for oil temperature estimation [3],
PINNs integrate physics and data simultaneously
during training. This leads to models that not only
capture empirical patterns, but also enforce consis-
tency with governing equations, thereby improving
generalization while reducing dependence on large
labeled datasets.

Index
Terms—Transformer,
insulation,
Physics-
informed Neural Networks (PINNs), Bayesian PINNs,
uncertainty
quantification,
Prognostics
&
Health
Management (PHM).

In the context of Prognostics and Health Manage-
ment (PHM), and particularly for prognostics models
that aim to predict the Remaining Useful Life (RUL)
of an asset, uncertainty quantification (UQ) is critical
for reliable future ageing predictions [4]. In the UQ
literature, uncertainty is commonly divided into two
categories: aleatoric uncertainty, which arises from
noisy or incomplete data (e.g., sensor errors), and
epistemic uncertainty, which reflects the limitations
of the model or incomplete knowledge (e.g., network
architecture or parameter uncertainty). In this work,
we focus on epistemic uncertainty, which directly
affects the ability of NNs to learn and generalize.

I. Introduction
P
HYSICS-informed Neural Networks (PINNs)
have emerged as a promising approach to ad-
dress some of the limitations of classical Neural
Networks (NNs) in science and engineering applica-
tions. In particular, two major challenges are often
cited: (i) the absence of an explicit physical reason-
ing mechanism and (ii) the diﬀiculty of operating
reliably under scarce data conditions. Building on
the foundations of Neural Networks and Reinforce-
ment Learning introduced in Part I, this second

J. Aizpurua is with the University of the Basque Country
(UPV/EHU), Faculty of Informatics, Department of Computer
Science and Artificial Intelligence, Donostia - San Sebastian,
Spain.
978-84-XX-XXXXX-X /25 © 2025 Red iNtransf
“© 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in
any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating
new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or
lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in
other works.”

The remainder of this paper is structured as
follows. Section II introduces PINNs for embed-
ding physics into NN training. Section III extends
PINNs to Bayesian PINNs for epistemic uncertainty
quantification. Finally, Section IV summarizes the
findings and outlines future research directions in
machine learning for transformer health monitoring.

II. Physics-Informed Neural Networks

A. Motivation: Neural Networks Constrained by
Physics

L(θ) = λ0 ·L0(θ)+λPDE ·Lr(θ)+λBC ·LBC(θ), (3)

with,

Classical Neural Networks and their variants, such
as Convolutional NNs (CNNs), excel in pattern
recognition tasks when abundant labeled data is
available. However, in many industrial applications,
including transformer condition monitoring, labeled
data is scarce, expensive to obtain, and often does
not cover the full range of operating conditions.
At the same time, the behaviour of these systems
is governed by well-understood physical laws, such
as heat transfer or fluid dynamics. PINNs provide
a framework to incorporate such knowledge directly
into the Neural Network training process [5]. By con-
straining the NN with governing equations, PINNs
learn from both sparse data and encoded physics,
ensuring physically consistent outputs and improved
extrapolation.
Key motivations for using PINNs include:

N0
∑

L0(θ) = 1

i=1
|ˆu(xi, 0) −u(xi, 0)|2
(4)

N0

Nr
∑

i=1
|r(xi, ti)|2
(5)

Lr(θ) =

NBC
∑

LBC(θ) =
1
NBC

i=1
|ˆu(xi, 0) −u(xi, ti)|2
(6)

where θ
=
{w, b}, N0, NBC, and Nr are the
number of initial conditions, boundary conditions
and residual points respectively, u(xi, ti) and r(xi, ti)
denote the known solution and the residual of the
PDE, respectively, for each training point i defined
at coordinates (xi, ti), and λ0, λBC, and λr are the
global multipliers for initial conditions, boundary
conditions, and residual terms, respectively.
The specification of local multipliers to normalize
the loss function is a challenging activity, refer to
[1] for potential solutions. Moreover, it may be
the case that the loss function in Eq. (3) includes
an additional data loss term, including additional
measurements that can act as regularization terms
during the PINN training process.
Automatic differentiation enables eﬀicient compu-
tation of PDE residuals with respect to NN outputs,
ˆu, ensuring that the governing equations are enforced
throughout the domain, not just at measurement
points. Fig. 1 illustrates the generic PINN architec-
ture.

• Physical consistency. Ensures predictions com-
ply with encoded physical laws.

• Improved generalization. Enables extrapolation
beyond the training regime.

• Interpretability. Outputs remain linked to mea-
surable physical quantities.

• Data eﬀiciency. Physics constraints act as im-
plicit regularizers.

B. Core Concepts

A PINN models the solution of a physical system,
typically described by a Partial Differential Equa-
tion (PDE), using a Neural Network uθ(x, t) with
trainable parameters θ. The PDE can be written
generically as [5]:

NN
layers

ut + N[u; λ] = 0,
x ∈Ω,
t ∈[0, T],
(1)

where u(t, x) denotes the solution, N[·; λ] is a non-
linear differential operator parameterized by λ, and
Ωis the spatiotemporal domain.
For fixed model parameters λ, the goal is to solve
ut + N[u] = 0, x ∈Ω, t ∈[0, T], by defining the
residual function, r(t, x):



t

x



Lr( )
u

x

t



2x

r(t, x) := ut + N[u].
(2)



The PINN seeks an NN approximation uθ(x, t) with
θ = {w, b} being the set of NN’s weight and bias
parameters, that minimizes the residual across the
domain while also satisfying boundary and initial
conditions. This is achieved through a composite loss
function L(θ):

L( )

Fig. 1. Generic PINN structure with spatio-temporal coordi-
nates as inputs x, t, predictions ˆu at the output, temporal and
spatial derivatives that define the residual loss Lr(θ), and the
total loss L(θ) with respect to the NN parameters θ.

O (H,t) =
TO (t)

Using the composite loss (3), the network parame-
ters θ are updated via backpropagation and gradient-
based optimization.

H

Transformer
tank

h (
O (x,t) -
A(t))
k

x

q (x,t)

C. Case Study: Transformer Thermal Ageing
Transformer insulation ageing is mainly driven by
temperature-dependent chemical processes. There-
fore, accurately estimating the internal tempera-
ture distribution is crucial for predicting insulation
health. In practice, however, internal temperature
sensors are sparse and invasive, making direct mon-
itoring diﬀicult.
A simplified yet effective model is the one-
dimensional (1D) heat-diffusion equation:

0

O (0,t) =
A (t)

t

Δt

0

Fig. 2.
Schematic of the transformer heat diffusion model,
including heat sources and boundary conditions.

Given the input profiles {K(t), ΘA(t), ΘT O(t)},
the PDE in Eq. (7) can be solved numerically, e.g.,
with Finite Element Methods (FEM). Fig. 3 shows
the FEM reference solution for a representative case
study [1].

k ∂2ΘO(x, t)

∂x2
+ q(x, t) = ρcp ∂ΘO(x, t)

∂t
,
(7)

where:

• x, t ∈R are spatial and temporal coordinates,

• ΘO(x, t) is the oil temperature [K],

• k is thermal conductivity [W/m·K],

• ρ is oil density [kg/m3],

• cp is specific heat capacity [J/kg·K],

• q(x, t) is internal heat generation [W/m3],
Defining the thermal diffusivity α =
k
ρcp [m2/s],
the PDE can be rewritten as:

∂2ΘO(x, t)

k q(x, t) = 1

α
∂ΘO(x, t)

∂x2
+ 1

∂t
.
(8)

The heat source term q(x, t) accounts for load and
no-load losses, as well as convective cooling:

q(x, t) = P0 + PK(t) −h (ΘO(x, t) −ΘA(t)) ,
(9)

Fig. 3. Reference temperature distribution obtained via FEM
simulation.

where:

• P0 is no-load loss [W],

Instead of solving Eq. (7) directly, a PINN can
be trained to approximate ΘO(x, t) across the spa-
tiotemporal domain. Using the loss function in
Eq. (3), the NN learns not only from available
measurements, but also from the PDE residuals and
boundary conditions. Fig. 4 shows the prediction
error of the PINN compared to the FEM baseline.
The results confirm that the PINN achieves ac-
curate temperature estimation, closely following the
FEM solution. Compared with numerical solvers, the
PINN requires significantly less computational effort
once trained. Moreover, PINNs generalize to unseen
loading and ambient conditions, leveraging physics to
avoid overfitting. The simplest vanilla PINN model
can be further improved through different mecha-
nisms. Refer to [1] for a complete set of solutions.
Importantly, PINNs enable the extension of classi-
cal health indicators. For instance, insulation ageing

• PK(t) = K(t)2µ is load loss, where K(t) is load
factor [p.u.] and µ is the rated loss [W],

• h
is
convective
heat-transfer
coeﬀicient
[W/m2·K],

• ΘA(t) is ambient temperature [K].
Boundary conditions are imposed using accessible
measurements:

ΘO(0, t) = ΘA(t),

ΘO(H, t) = ΘT O(t),
(10)

where H is the height of the transformer tank and
ΘT O(t) is the measured top-oil temperature.
Fig. 2 shows the thermal parameters of the trans-
former of the heat diffusion model [1], which consid-
ers the heat source, q(x, t), and the convective heat
transfer, h(ΘO(x, t) −ΘA(t)).

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is generally di-
vided into [8]:

• Aleatoric uncertainty: inherent variability from
noisy measurements or stochastic phenomena.

• Epistemic uncertainty: uncertainty due to in-
complete knowledge, e.g., limited data or model
misspecification.
In this work, we focus on epistemic uncertainty,
which directly reflects how well the Neural Network
generalizes under limited data. To capture it, we
extend PINNs into a Bayesian framework, resulting
in Bayesian PINNs (B-PINNs).

Fig. 4. Prediction error of the PINN model compared to FEM.

B. Core Concepts

In standard NNs, weights θ are treated as deter-
ministic parameters. In Bayesian Neural Networks
(BNNs), weights are instead modeled as probabil-
ity distributions [9]. Given data D = {x(i), y(i)},
Bayesian inference updates prior beliefs p(θ) into a
posterior distribution:

is often estimated from bulk temperature values [3],
[6], [7]. By incorporating spatiotemporal estimates
(Eq. (7)), PINNs allow for spatially resolved ageing
assessment. Fig. 5 illustrates the instantaneous spa-
tial ageing distribution derived from Arrhenius’ law
applied to the PINN-predicted temperature field.

p(θ|D) = p(D|θ)p(θ)

p(D)
,
(11)

where p(D|θ) is the likelihood, p(θ) the prior, and
p(D) the marginal likelihood.
The likelihood is often estimated the individual
product of pointwise estimated likelihoods pi(D|θ)
based on the normal distribution N(µ, σ) defined as
follows:

N
∏

i=0
p(y(i)|x(i), θ)
(12)

P(D|θ) =

Fig. 5.
Instantaneous transformer insulation spatial ageing,
V (x, t).

2πσ exp(−||xi −x(ti)||2

p(y(i)|x(i), θ) =
1
√

2σ2
)
(13)

This case study highlights the potential of PINNs
to enable data-eﬀicient, physics-consistent trans-
former health monitoring, paving the way for ad-
vanced digital twins that integrate thermal and
ageing dynamics.

For the sake of simplicity we will consider a
Gaussian prior (with mean zero and unit variance).
See [2] and references herein for other alternatives.
The analytical posterior in BNNs, p(θ|D), is gener-
ally intractable, and therefore approximation meth-
ods are required. In this work, variational inference
(VI) is used to approximate the true posterior p(θ|D)
with a tractable variational distribution q(θ|ϕ) of
known functional form, parameterized by ϕ, by
minimizing the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
between them.
The approximation is optimized by maximizing
the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), which balances
(i) a KL divergence term between the variational
distribution and the prior p(θ) (known as model
complexity), and (ii) a data fit term (likelihood).
The corresponding optimization objective, can be

III. Bayesian Physics-informed Neural Networks
A. Motivation
While PINNs successfully embed physical laws
into Neural Network training, they provide deter-
ministic predictions. For critical applications such as
transformer health monitoring, deterministic outputs
are not suﬀicient and asset management teams and
operators also need to understand the confidence and
reliability of model predictions. This is especially
important under sparse data and uncertain future
load/ambient conditions.

Bayesian Neural Network

Physics

Inputs

Output

Residual Loss

BC and IC Loss

Total Loss

Fig. 6. Proposed Bayesian-PINN approach for the probabilistic spatiotemporal transformer thermal model.

approximated by Monte Carlo sampling, drawing N
samples θ(i) from q(θ|ϕ) [9]:

defined for a generic BNN [cf. Eq. (14)], is adapted
for B-PINN posterior inference:

N
∑

L(i) = log q(θ(i)|w) −log p(θ(i))

[
log q(θ(i)|ϕ)−log p(θ(i))−log p(D|θ(i))
]

L(D,ϕ)≈1

N

−λ0 log p(u0|x0, θ(i))

i=1

(14)
Throughout this paper, the variational posterior
is assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution ϕ =
(µ, σ), where µ is the mean vector of the distribution
and σ is the standard deviation vector.

(16)

−λb log p(ubc|xbc, tbc, θ(i))

−λr log p(r|xf, tf, θ(i))

This process results in the approximation of the
variational posterior distribution q(θ|w).
This process results in the approximation of the
variational posterior distribution q(θ|w). The train-
ing process of the B-PINN approach is summarized
in Algorithm 1.

C. B-PINN Formulation

Recall that PINNs define a composite loss (Eq. (3))
that enforces data, PDE residuals, and bound-
ary/initial conditions. In a Bayesian setting, these
terms enter through the likelihood, P(D|Θ), which
is estimated assuming a Gaussian distribution (cf.
Eq. (13)), defined as follows:

D. Case Study: Probabilistic Transformer Thermal
Modelling

(

)

N0
∏

We apply the B-PINN framework to the same
1D heat diffusion problem introduced in Section II.
Fig. 6 summarizes the architecture.
Fig. 7 shows the posterior mean and standard
deviation of the oil temperature distribution. The
mean closely matches FEM reference results, while
the standard deviation quantifies predictive uncer-
tainty.
Comparisons with FEM reveal that the B-PINN
not only reduces mean prediction error but also pro-
vides localized uncertainty estimates (Fig. 8). This
enables operators to distinguish between confident
and less reliable predictions.

−∥ˆu(x0, 0; θ(i)) −u0∥2

1
√

p(u0|x0, θ(i)) =

2πσ0
exp

2σ2
0

i=1

(

)

Nbc
∏

−∥ˆu(xbc, tbc; θ(i))−ubc∥2

1
√

p(ubc|xbc, tbc, θ(i))=

2πσbc
exp

2σ2
bc

i=1

(

)

Nf
∏

−∥r(xf, tf; θ(i))∥2

1
√

p(r(xf, tf; θ(i))) =

2πσf
exp

2σ2
f

i=1

(15)

where σ0, σbc, and σf denote the standard deviation
of initial, boundary, and residual points.
For computational tractability and eﬀiciency, the
log-likelihood terms are considered by taking the
logarithm of Eq. (15). Subsequently, the ELBO loss

Algorithm 1 B-PINN Training via Variational Infer-
ence

1: Input: Collocation points (xf, tf), initial con-
dition data (x0, u0), boundary condition data
(xbc, tbc, ubc), prior distribution p(θ)

2: Initialize variational parameters w = {µ, σ} for
θ
3: while not converged do
4:
Sample θ(i) ∼q(θ|w) via reparameterization
trick
5:
Compute outputs: ˆu(x, t; θ(i))

6:
Compute PDE residual: r(xf, tf; θ(i))
7:
Evaluate log-likelihood terms taking the log
of Eq. (15)
8:
Evaluate prior log-probability: log p(θ(i))
9:
Evaluate variational density: log q(θ(i)|w)
10:
Compute Monte Carlo estimate of ELBO loss
via Eq. (16)
11:
Update w = {µ, σ} using gradients ∇wL(i)

12: Return: Variational posterior q(θ|w)

Fig. 8.
Error analysis of B-PINN predictions compared to
FEM: (a) mean error; (b) uncertainty of error.

E. Discussion
The B-PINN framework enhances PINNs by pro-
viding probabilistic, physics-consistent predictions.
For transformer applications, this is valuable be-
cause:

• Operators gain confidence intervals alongside
predictions, improving decision-making.

• High-uncertainty regions highlight where addi-
tional sensing or simulation is most needed.

• Compared with deterministic PINNs, B-PINNs
offer more robust generalization under scarce or
noisy data.
Despite these benefits, B-PINNs remain computa-
tionally demanding due to sampling and variational
inference overheads. Future research will explore
more scalable Bayesian inference techniques and
physics-informed priors to improve eﬀiciency and
robustness.

IV. Conclusions
This two-part series has explored how neural
network methodologies can be adapted and extended
for transformer health monitoring. In Part I, we re-
viewed the foundations of neural networks and their

Fig. 7. B-PINN posterior predictions: (a) mean oil tempera-
ture; (b) associated uncertainty (standard deviation).

variants, including convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for acoustic monitoring and reinforcement
learning (RL) for transformer energization control.
These methods demonstrated how data-driven mod-
els can capture complex patterns and enable adaptive
decision-making in transformer operation.
In this Part II, we shifted focus toward the
integration of physics and uncertainty into neu-
ral network learning. Physics-Informed Neural Net-
works (PINNs) were introduced as a framework that
embeds governing physical laws directly into the
training process. Applied to transformer thermal
ageing, PINNs demonstrated the ability to general-
ize under scarce data, provide physically consistent
predictions, and bridge data-driven learning with
established thermal models. Building upon this,
Bayesian PINNs (B-PINNs) extended the framework
to account for epistemic uncertainty, yielding prob-
abilistic spatiotemporal predictions and confidence
intervals that are crucial for decision-making in asset
management.
Taken
together,
these
contributions
outline
a
roadmap
toward
reliable,
physics-aware,
and
uncertainty-informed machine learning for critical
power assets. The following key insights emerge:

Brian Stewart. I would also like to thank Xose M.
Lopez-Fernandez for the invitation to present this
tutorial at the ARWTr 2025 conference. In this Part
II, I would like to acknowledge my collaborators on
PINNs and B-PINNs: Ibai Ramirez, Jokin Alcibar,
Joel Pino, Mikel Sanz, David Pardo, Luis del Rio,
Alvaro Ortiz, and Kateryna Morozovska.
This work has been partially funded by the
Spanish State Research Agency through the Ramón
y Cajal Fellowship (grant No. RYC2022-037300-
I)
and
Proyectos
Generación
de
Conocimiento
(grant No. PID2024-156284OA-I00), co-funded by
MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and FSE+.

References

[1] I. Ramirez, J. Pino, D. Pardo, M. Sanz, L. del Rio, A. Ortiz,
K. Morozovska, and J. I. Aizpurua, “Residual-based atten-
tion physics-informed neural networks for spatio-temporal
ageing assessment of transformers operated in renewable
power plants,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intel-
ligence, vol. 139, p. 109556, 2025.
[2] I. Ramirez, J. Alcibar, J. Pino, M. Sanz, D. Pardo, and J. I.
Aizpurua, “Bayesian physics informed neural networks
for
reliable
transformer
prognostics,”
2025,
Accepted
for
the
Annual
Prognostics
&
Health
Management
(PHM)
Society
Conference
2025.
[Online].
Available:

[3] J. I. Aizpurua, I. Ramirez, I. Lasa, L. d. Rio, A. Ortiz, and
B. G. Stewart, “Hybrid transformer prognostics framework
for enhanced probabilistic predictions in renewable en-
ergy applications,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 599–609, 2023.
[4] S. Sankararaman, “Significance, interpretation, and quan-
tification of uncertainty in prognostics and remaining
useful life prediction,” Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, vol. 52-53, pp. 228–247, 2015.
[5] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis, “Physics-
informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for
solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations,” Journal of Computational
Physics, vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019.
[6] J. I. Aizpurua, S. D. J. McArthur, B. G. Stewart, B. Lam-
bert, J. G. Cross, and V. M. Catterson, “Adaptive power
transformer lifetime predictions through machine learning
and uncertainty modeling in nuclear power plants,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 6, pp.
4726–4737, 2019.
[7] J. Aizpurua, B. Stewart, S. McArthur, M. Penalba, M. Bar-
renetxea, E. Muxika, and J. Ringwood, “Probabilistic
forecasting informed failure prognostics framework for
improved rul prediction under uncertainty: A transformer
case study,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety, vol.
226, p. 108676, 2022.
[8] A. F. Psaros, X. Meng, Z. Zou, L. Guo, and G. E. Kar-
niadakis, “Uncertainty quantification in scientific machine
learning: Methods, metrics, and comparisons,” Journal of
Computational Physics, vol. 477, p. 111902, 2023.
[9] L. V. Jospin, H. Laga, F. Boussaid, W. Buntine, and
M. Bennamoun, “Hands-on bayesian neural networks—
a tutorial for deep learning users,” IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 29–48, 2022.

• Data-driven methods (Part I) excel in captur-
ing patterns from rich sensor streams, but are
limited when data is scarce or extrapolation is
required.

• Physics-informed methods (Part II) improve
extrapolation and robustness by embedding do-
main knowledge, acting as implicit regularizers.

• Bayesian extensions provide uncertainty quan-
tification, turning predictions into actionable in-
sights by indicating confidence and highlighting
where more sensing or modeling effort is needed.
Looking ahead, future research should focus on:

• Developing scalable solvers for multi-physics and
high-dimensional PINNs.

• Designing physics-informed priors and eﬀicient
inference methods to reduce the computational
overhead of B-PINNs.

• Leveraging hybrid frameworks that integrate
data-driven, physics-based, and probabilistic ap-
proaches within digital twins of transformers.
Overall, the fusion of physics, data, and uncer-
tainty quantification opens the way for the next
generation of trustworthy and eﬀicient diagnostic
and prognostic models, enabling more reliable and
sustainable transformer fleet management.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to all my collaborators and mentors,
especially Vic Catterson, Stephen McArthur, and