Bridging the Gap: Adapting Evidence to Decision Frameworks to
support the link between Software Engineering academia and
industry

Patrícia G. F. Matsubara
Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul (UFMS)
Campo Grande, Brazil

Tayana Uchôa Conte
Federal University of Amazonas (UFAM)
Manaus, Brazil

1
Introduction

Abstract

Over twenty years ago, the Software Engineering (SE) research
community have been involved with Evidence-Based Software En-
gineering (EBSE). EBSE aims to inform industrial practice with the
best evidence from rigorous research, preferably from systematic
literature reviews (SLRs). Since then, SE researchers have conducted
many SLRs, perfected their SLR procedures, proposed alternative
ways of presenting their results (such as Evidence Briefings), and
profusely discussed how to conduct research that impacts practice.
Nevertheless, there is still a feeling that SLRs’ results are not reach-
ing practitioners. Something is missing. In this vision paper, we
introduce Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks from the health
sciences, which propose gathering experts in panels to assess the
existing best evidence about the impact of an intervention in all
relevant outcomes and make structured recommendations based
on them. The insight we can leverage from EtD frameworks is not
their structure per se but all the relevant criteria for making recom-
mendations to practitioners from SLRs. Furthermore, we provide a
worked example based on an SE SLR. We also discuss the challenges
the SE research and practice community may face when adopting
EtD frameworks, highlighting the need for more comprehensive
criteria in our recommendations to industry practitioners.

Evidence-Based Software Engineering (EBSE) aims to provide the
means by which the best evidence from rigorous research could be
used to make decisions in industrial practice [15]. An implication
from this is the requirement of research in Software Engineering
(SE) to be relevant for industry practice. Another implication is
the need to search for the currently available best evidence. SE re-
searchers achieve this through systematic literature reviews (SLRs),
whose goal is “to search for and identify all relevant material re-
lated to a given topic” [14, Section 1.3]. Researchers follow a set
of well-defined procedures, which are meant to be “as objective,
analytical, and repeatable as possible” [14, Section 1.3].
Nevertheless, finding all the available evidence regarding a topic
employing a reliable process does not necessarily mean such evi-
dence is “credible”, i.e., evidence we can trust [19] to make decisions
and take action in the real world. There might be insufficient evi-
dence to support a strong conclusion, and more research might still
be required to raise confidence in one intervention or another. Con-
sidering this, Dyba et al. [8] introduced the SE research community
to the GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Develop-
ment, and Evaluation) methodology for assessing how “strong” is
the existing evidence supporting research findings from SLRs.
Still, even if SE researchers find strong and reliable evidence
supporting an intervention, it must reach practitioners’ ears and
bring with it all relevant information for decision-making. In part,
this requires presenting actionable results from research and de-
scribing the implications of findings for practice. In other words,
this requires the making of clear recommendations for practitioners.
Curiously, GRADE is not only about the strength assessment of a
body of evidence but is also about making and assessing recom-
mendations for practitioners—something that we, as SE researchers,
seem to have missed from the seminal paper of Dyba et al. [8]. In
this paper, we address this gap by briefly summarizing an approach
for making such recommendations, thus addressing the connection
between academia and industry: Evidence to Decision (EtD) frame-
works. We also present a worked example of EtD frameworks and
discuss the challenges to its application in the SE domain. In the
next section, we present related work.

arXiv:2602.08015v1 [cs.SE] 8 Feb 2026

CCS Concepts

• Software and its engineering; • Social and professional top-
ics →Management of computing and information systems;

Keywords

Evidence-Based Software Engineering, Evidence to Decision

ACM Reference Format:
Patrícia G. F. Matsubara and Tayana Uchôa Conte. 2026. Bridging the Gap:
Adapting Evidence to Decision Frameworks to support the link between
Software Engineering academia and industry. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA,
5 pages.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from
ICSE - FoSE 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM

2
Background and Related Work

In 2008, Dyba et al. [8] raised concerns about how much confidence
one can have in SLR results, introducing the SE community to the
need of evaluating the quality of primary studies. Since then, a grow-
ing number of SLRs have assessed the quality of primary studies in
SE[20]. Dyba et al. [8] also presented the GRADE methodology for

assessing the strength of a body of evidence. GRADE suggests that
the analysis of the strength of the evidence supporting a research
finding is more than just the quality of the primary studies. It should
include other relevant dimensions: publication bias, inconsistency
of results, imprecision of results, and the indirection coming from
differences in population, intervention, and outcome of interest
targeted for answering a research question. Issues in these dimen-
sions are reasons to downgrade the confidence of otherwise strong
evidence [5]. The approach recommends the summarization of re-
search findings and the judgments for each relevant dimension of
the strength of evidence in Evidence Profiles (where judgments
for all GRADE dimensions are detailed) or Summary of findings
(where only the overall judgment for strength is presented) tables
[11]. However, very few SLR in the SE domain have assessed the
strength of the evidence they gathered [16].
Cartaxo et al. [7] proposed Evidence Briefings (EBs), brief doc-
uments summarizing SLR results, to disseminate SLR’ findings to
practitioners. Despite being a clear and understandable medium,
EBs may not fully answer the practical questions practitioners have
[7]. Also, EBs may not include all the information required to sup-
port a decision from a practitioner in their daily practice, such as
the resources needed for adopting a method or tool [1].
Back to GRADE, the approach also aims to assist the development
of guidelines with recommendations for practitioners based on
the evidence from SLRs [11]. The working group responsible for
developing GRADE proposed the idea of Evidence to Decision (EtD)
frameworks, which aggregate information (evidence included) to
assist practitioners’ decision-making regarding interventions. We
explain this framework in detail in the next section.

consider when defining the question to structure their judgments
and to reach a recommendation. It also shows a worked example
of a question for the SE domain on the topic of pair programming
in comparison with solo programming. The worked example is
inspired by the SLR results of Hannay et al. [13], but not necessarily
wholly faithful to the most current and best-existing evidence on
the topic. When needed, we also inserted fictitious decisions for
the panel to increase the force of the example and provide means
for reflection on what we can represent with EtD frameworks.
The question uses the PICO (population, intervention, compari-
son, outcome) format, and a few additional details [3]. When defin-
ing the population, the panel must clarify any relevant characteris-
tics of the targeted people for the intervention. For example, only
people at a high-risk of a catastrophic outcome (e.g. death) might
be targeted. Determining how broad is the population or the inter-
vention is a challenging decision when formulating the question,
and a practical guideline is to consider variations of magnitudes
of effects of the treatment across subgroups of the population or
across differences in treatment options [12]. The panel should also
be specific about the intervention and the comparison, i.e., the al-
ternative treatment. In medicine, this can involve decisions about
doses, and a combination of drugs. The outcomes of interest also
clarify the variables used in the assessment of the intervention and
the comparison.
Depending on the question, the definition of the setting is crucial.
It helps identify constraints that might limit the recommendations,
e.g., the wealth of a country can impose limitations on feasible
treatments to provide in health care systems. The perspective helps
to create a “practitioner” focus, clarifying whether the panel has to
answer with an individual or group point of view in mind. It will
influence the outcomes of interest to analyze and even economic
evaluations [6]. For instance, an individual might have low con-
cerns regarding the costs of a treatment if a health system pays
for it. However, the cost information will be most important when
assuming a health system perspective. The subgroup aids in spec-
ifying sub-populations for which recommendations might differ
from the overall population, given their specific characteristics and
the existing evidence.
Also, the panel needs to inform whether any of its members have
conflicts of interest—for instance, on promoting the intervention
or the comparison for any reason. Valid reasons can include partic-
ipation in organizations that provide tools or training associated
with the intervention, for example. Identifying conflicts will aid the
panel in dealing with them, either by just declaring the conflict or
excluding members from discussions about specific questions [3].
In the worked example, the panel’s recommendation is made
without specific constraints, applicable to organizations or teams
developing software. It notes that the recommendation might differ
for inexperienced developers, who may achieve different results
than experienced ones. One of the panel members declared a conflict
of interest, as he is a member of an organization that provides
training in the topic of interest. Therefore, he might have a more
favorable view of the effects of the intervention. In summary, the
question provides the details to guide the assessment criteria for
making a recommendation. The next section presents these criteria
and continues with our worked example.

3
The elements of an EtD Framework

Originally, an EtD is meant to help creating and assessing a recom-
mendation or guideline regarding a clinical question about what to
do when treating a patient, considering the evidence about existing
interventions. Its creation involves two major stages, as Figure 1
illustrates: an evidence synthesis and a recommendation stage.
During the evidence synthesis stage, reviewers gather the best
available evidence to answer the question through typical SLR pro-
cedures. This means synthesizing evidence and concluding about
the targeted intervention’s effects on critical outcomes of interest.
Reviewers also critically appraise the confidence (or strength) on
such evidence, i.e. on the estimates of the effects of the intervention.
During the recommendation stage, a panel of experts knowl-
edgeable in SLR procedures, the GRADE system, and the topic of
interest are responsible for making the recommendation. They will
use the information from the SLR, along with other criteria defined
by EtD frameworks to do so. The panel will follow three steps,
which correspond to the three sections of the EtD structure [3],
which we explore in the next sections:

(1) Formulating the question (Section 3.1);
(2) Making an assessment (Section 3.2); and
(3) Drawing a conclusion (Section 3.3).

3.1
Formulating the question

The first step in the EtD framework is formulating a question to
address. Table 1 presents all the items that a panel of experts must

SLR

informs

Recommendation or guideline

●
Answering a question
●
Providing evidence synthesis for outcomes of interest
●
Grading the certainty of evidence

●
Making a recommendation about an intervention
●
Clarifying their judgments based on evidence
produce
produce

Panel of experts

Evidence synthesis stage
Reviewers
Recommendation stage

Figure 1: The relationship between SLRs and recommendations/guidelines.

Question: The question using the PICO (population, intervention, comparison, outcome) format. Example: Should pair programming
be adopted in software development projects?
Question details:
(P)
Popula-
tion:

The characteristics of the targeted population for the interven-
tion/comparison.

Ex.: Software developers.

The intervention that the recommendation focuses on.
Ex.: Pair programming.

(I)
Interven-
tion:

An alternative treatment to the intervention.
Ex.: Solo programming.

(C) Compari-
son:

The critical outcomes of interest to analyze when recommend-
ing an intervention or its comparison.

Ex.: Duration, effort, quality.

(O) Main out-
comes:

Setting:
The characteristics of the environment where the recommenda-
tion is to be implemented.

Ex.: A software development organization in general.

Perspective:
The perspective taken for the recommendation. It can be of an
individual practitioner deciding to adopt the intervention, or of
an organization that can also adopt it.

Ex.: The organization/team.

Subgroups:
Description of subgroups for which the recommendation is
likely to vary due to special characteristics they possess, if
there is any.

Ex.: Inexperienced software developers.

Ex.: Mr. James Smith is a member of an organization
that provides training for pair programming dynamics.
The remaining panel members declared no conflict.
Table 1: Items (from [3]) for formulating the question, and their descriptions (by the authors).

Any conflict of interest that any panel member might have
that can lead to the favouring of the intervention or of the
comparison.

Conflicts
of
interest:

3.2
Making an assessment

from the question: quality, duration, and effort. The judgment for
the criterion “Is the intervention acceptable to key stakeholders?”
also consider the perspective informed in the question: organiza-
tions and teams, instead of the perspective of individual developers.
The panel could even explore the relevant subgroup included in the
question during their judgments by creating a separate Summary
of Findings with evidence for this specific subgroup or additional
considerations if there is enough evidence that the results for the
outcomes of interest were different for these groups.

In the second step, the panel judges a set of criteria relevant to
practitioners’ decision-making. These criteria vary with the type
of decision. In the health domain, types of decisions include (i)
clinical recommendations from an individual perspective, (ii) clini-
cal recommendations from a population perspective, (iii) coverage
decisions1, (iv) health system and public health system recommen-
dations/decisions, and (v) diagnostic, screening, or other tests [3].
Table 2 shows a few of the criteria for two decision types in
Alonso-Coello et al. [2]: population-based and individual recom-
mendations. Some criteria are type-specific, while others apply to
both types. The supplementary material [17] shows the judgments
of a fictitious panel of experts for some of these relevant criteria
from the perspective of organizations or teams pondering whether
to adopt pair programming, aligned with the question in Section
3.1.
The judgments are guided by the question Section 3.1 presents.
For instance, for the criterion “How substantial are the desirable
anticipated effects?” (from Table 2) the panel used the Summary of
Findings table with the evidence for all the outcomes of interest

3.3
Drawing a conclusion

In the third step, the panel draws a conclusion from their judg-
ments for all criteria and deliver an actionable, specific, and clear
recommendation for practitioners. [3]. The panel informs the rec-
ommendation’s direction: in favor or against the intervention. The
panel must also declare the recommendation’s strength, which can
be either strong—when it is highly likely that a patient will accept
the intervention/treatment in any circumstances—or discretionary—
when a patient’s acceptance of the intervention/treatment will vary
depending on the balance between desirable and undesirable effects,
and their values and preferences, among other things [4].

1For health insurance providers.

Population perspective
Individual perspective
Is the problem a priority (from a population perspective)?
Is the problem a priority (from an individual perspective)?
How substantial are the desirable anticipated effects?
What is the overall certainty of the evidence of effects?
Does the balance between desirable and undesirable effects favour the intervention or the comparison?
What is the certainty of the evidence of resource require-
ments (costs)?

Does the cost effectiveness of the intervention (the out-of-pocket cost rela-
tive to the net desirable effect) favour the intervention or the comparison?
Is the intervention acceptable to key stakeholders?*
Is the intervention acceptable to patients, their caregivers, and healthcare
providers?
Table 2: Examples of criteria for making assessments for population and individual perspectives (from [2]).

The supplementary material also shows the panel’s recommen-
dations for our worked example [17]. Such recommendation is
discretionary, as different organizations and teams will likely vary
in their decision to adopt pair programming for the many reasons
explained in the recommendation. For instance, for some organiza-
tions, the undesirable effect of higher effort might be unacceptable.
The recommendation also includes details that can help practi-
tioners implement the intervention and monitor and evaluate its
efficacy. In the worked example, the panel considers it relevant
for organizations to have a productivity measurement system in
place to help assess the impact of pair programming on productiv-
ity. The recommendation also presents further research directions
to increase confidence in the evidence or explore gaps likely nec-
essary for better comprehension of the intervention’s effects on
relevant outcomes of interest. In the worked example, the panel
highlights the importance of considering the individual perspective
when making decisions by identifying software developers’ values
and preferences towards working solo or in pairs. The panel also
considers the need to perform primary research on the effects of
pair programming on other critical and unexplored outcomes of
interest, such as learning, especially when onboarding new team
members. Moreover, they consider that measuring developers’ sat-
isfaction and well-being helps to understand productivity better
[9], so it is also a critical outcome to further research.
The recommendation created with an EtD framework will stem
from a clear question defined with practitioners in mind. Then, the
ETD framework guides the panel in judging the existing evidence,
accounting for all relevant issues practitioners will likely consider in
making a decision about an intervention. Such evidence is unlikely
to come from a single SLR [21], so EtD frameworks provide the
means for gathering it in a single place. The framework also allows
the panel to highlight the strength of their recommendations based
on the objective criteria assessed, which is unusual in SLRs and can
be a relevant factor for decision-making. Panels are also expected
to update EtD frameworks and their recommendations occasionally
or when new relevant evidence emerges. This can also benefit
practitioners, enabling them to update their knowledge in their
fields of expertise more easily.

Who are the entities entitled to make a recommendation
for industry practitioners, if any? Clinicians can turn to national
specialty associations and even worldwide organizations such as
WHO (World Health Organization) for guidelines. SE chapters of
professional associations such as ACM SIGSOFT (ACM Special
Software Engineering Group) and IEEE TCSE (IEEE Technical Com-
munity on Software Engineering) could assume a similar role in
Software Engineering by organizing expert panels to develop and
issue guidelines. Additionally, invited panels of technical experts
could contribute to guidelines published through Special Issues in
selected venues.
We need platforms where practitioners can look for an-
swers to their questions. Cartaxo et al. [7] found that most survey
participants preferred platforms like StackExchange over static EBs.
This suggests we should design and promote engaging platforms
where the information practitioners need is readily available in the
form of answers that EtD frameworks provide.
What are industry practitioners’ different types of deci-
sions and their relevant criteria? In Section 3.2, we present
the different types of decisions discussed in EtD frameworks for
the health domain. SE researchers must also identify the types of
decisions for which SE research can provide evidence, as this con-
nects to the criteria for making a recommendation. SE clearly can
make recommendations from an individual perspective—to soft-
ware developers, for instance. Kitchenham et al. [15] highlighted the
perspectives of project managers interested in results for specific
projects and senior managers interested in results for a department
or the whole organization. Such perspectives suggest there is likely
a need for recommendations for group perspectives, such as teams
and organizations, in SE too.
We must aggregate evidence around outcomes of interest.
Identifying different perspectives is paramount to defining relevant
criteria for recommendations and clarifying the different outcomes
of interests to consider when conducting primary studies. For in-
stance, while individual developers and software teams might focus
on maintainability when considering quality as an outcome of inter-
est, stakeholders with business or managerial points of view might
focus on user experience or customer satisfaction [10]. Additionally,
acceptability and feasibility may vary between group and individual
perspectives, depending on the intervention.
We also need to define the equivalent of “clinical ques-
tions”. Perhaps we can call such questions “practice questions”
to adapt to the SE context and differentiate them from research
questions. This connects with the finding of Cartaxo et al. [7] that,

4
Envisioned Challenges for SE

While the adoption of EtD frameworks in SE may present chal-
lenges, it also holds the potential to significantly impact the indus-
try. This section delves into the potential hurdles and issues the SE
community must resolve to leverage their benefits.

though participants might find SLR findings important, not nec-
essarily such findings answer their questions. This is critical and
current for primary research also. Winters [18] have recently re-
marked how research in a highly relevant SE venue still addresses
questions of no interest to the software industry or provides solu-
tions with no practical context.

guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to recommendation-determinants of a rec-
ommendation’s direction and strength. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 66, 7
(July 2013), 726–735. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.02.003
[5] Howard Balshem, Mark Helfand, Holger J. Schünemann, Andrew D. Oxman,
Regina Kunz, Jan Brozek, Gunn E. Vist, Yngve Falck-Ytter, Joerg Meerpohl, Susan
Norris, and Gordon H. Guyatt. 2011. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of
evidence. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 64, 4 (April 2011), 401–406. doi:10.
1016/j.jclinepi.2010.07.015 Publisher: Elsevier.
[6] Massimo Brunetti, Ian Shemilt, Silvia Pregno, Luke Vale, Andrew D. Oxman,
Joanne Lord, Jane Sisk, Francis Ruiz, Suzanne Hill, Gordon H. Guyatt, Roman
Jaeschke, Mark Helfand, Robin Harbour, Marina Davoli, Laura Amato, Alessandro
Liberati, and Holger J. Schünemann. 2013. GRADE guidelines: 10. Considering
resource use and rating the quality of economic evidence. Journal of Clinical Epi-
demiology 66, 2 (Feb. 2013), 140–150. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2012.04.012 Publisher:
Elsevier.
[7] Bruno Cartaxo, Gustavo Pinto, Elton Vieira, and Sergio Soares. 2016. Evidence
Briefings | Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement. In ESEM ’16: Proceedings of
the 10th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement. Association for Computing Machinery, Ciudad Real, Spain,
Article 57, 1–10. doi:10.1145/2961111.2962603
[8] Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr. 2008. Strength of evidence in systematic
reviews in software engineering. In Proceedings of the Second ACM-IEEE interna-
tional symposium on Empirical software engineering and measurement (ESEM
’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 178–187.
doi:10.1145/1414004.1414034
[9] Nicole Forsgren, Margaret-Anne Storey, Chandra Maddila, Thomas Zimmermann,
Brian Houck, and Jenna Butler. 2021. The SPACE of Developer Productivity:
There’s more to it than you think. Queue 19, 1 (March 2021), Pages 10:20–Pages
10:48. doi:10.1145/3454122.3454124
[10] Collin Green, Ciera Jaspan, Maggie Hodges, and Jessica Lin. 2024. Developer
Productivity for Humans, Part 7: Software Quality. IEEE Software 41, 1 (Jan. 2024),
25–30. doi:10.1109/MS.2023.3324830 Conference Name: IEEE Software.
[11] Gordon Guyatt, Andrew D. Oxman, Elie A. Akl, Regina Kunz, Gunn Vist, Jan
Brozek, Susan Norris, Yngve Falck-Ytter, Paul Glasziou, Hans deBeer, Roman
Jaeschke, David Rind, Joerg Meerpohl, Philipp Dahm, and Holger J. Schünemann.
2011. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction—GRADE evidence profiles and summary
of findings tables. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 64, 4 (April 2011), 383–394.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.04.026 Publisher: Elsevier.
[12] Gordon H. Guyatt, Andrew D. Oxman, Regina Kunz, David Atkins, Jan Brozek,
Gunn Vist, Philip Alderson, Paul Glasziou, Yngve Falck-Ytter, and Holger J.
Schünemann. 2011. GRADE guidelines: 2. Framing the question and decid-
ing on important outcomes. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 64, 4 (April 2011),
395–400. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.09.012
[13] Jo E. Hannay, Tore Dybå, Erik Arisholm, and Dag I. K. Sjøberg. 2009. The
effectiveness of pair programming: A meta-analysis. Information and Software
Technology 51, 7 (July 2009), 1110–1122. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2009.02.001
[14] Barbara Ann Kitchenham, David Budgen, and Pearl Brereton. 2015. Evidence-
Based Software Engineering and Systematic Reviews (1 ed.). CRC Press.
[15] Barbara A. Kitchenham, Tore Dyba, and Magne Jorgensen. 2004. Evidence-Based
Software Engineering. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE ’04). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA,
273–281.
[16] Patrícia G. F. Matsubara and Tayana Conte. 2025. The unfinished business of
evidence strength in software engineering: Current practices and future direc-
tions. Empirical Software Engineering 31, 1 (Oct. 2025), 4. doi:10.1007/s10664-
025-10728-9
[17] Patricia Matsubara and Tayana Conte. 2026. Supplementary Material for Bridg-
ing the Gap: Adapting Evidence to Decision Frameworks to support the link
between Software Engineering academia and industry.
m9.figshare.31039837
[18] Titus Winters. 2024. Thoughts on applicability. Journal of Systems and Software
215 (Sept. 2024), 112086. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2024.112086
[19] Claes Wohlin and Austen Rainer. 2021. Challenges and recommendations to
publishing and using credible evidence in software engineering. Information and
Software Technology 134 (June 2021), 106555. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106555
[20] Lanxin Yang, He Zhang, Haifeng Shen, Xin Huang, Xin Zhou, Guoping Rong,
and Dong Shao. 2021. Quality Assessment in Systematic Literature Reviews: A
Software Engineering Perspective. Information and Software Technology 130 (Feb.
2021), 106397. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2020.106397
[21] Yuan Zhang, Elie A. Akl, and Holger J. Schünemann. 2019.
Using system-
atic reviews in guideline development: The GRADE approach.
Research
Synthesis Methods 10, 3 (2019), 312–329.
doi:10.1002/jrsm.1313
_eprint:

5
Conclusion

The thing with EtD frameworks is not their structure per se but
all the information they show practitioners need for making mean-
ingful decisions against or in favor of an intervention. Evidence
about interventions’ effectiveness is insufficient, as the intervention
might be too costly to be adopted [1], or unacceptable to a relevant
set of stakeholders. In this paper, we describe the EtD frameworks
and present a worked example of their application in the SE domain.
We show that EtD frameworks include information lacking in in-
dividual SLRs in SE. EtD frameworks can also aid the SE research
community in directing research efforts, by clarifying missing ev-
idence to derive guidelines for practitioners or subgroups of the
population who can benefit from more specific recommendations.
Therefore, EtD frameworks are a promising method to help us close
the academia-industry gap.

Acknowledgments

This work was executed with the support of the Federal University
of Mato Grosso do Sul (Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do
Sul – UFMS – Brasil), of the brazilian funding agency FUNDECT
(Call number 42/2024), and of the Federal University of Amazonas
(Universidade Federal do Amazonas - UFAM - Brasil). This study
was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de
Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES) – Finance Code 001,
and by Amazonas State Research Support Foundation - FAPEAM
- through the POSGRAD project 2025/2026. We also would like
to thank the financial support granted by CNPq 445029/2024-2,
443934/2023-1, and 314797/2023-8.

References

[1] Nauman bin Ali. 2016. Is effectiveness sufficient to choose an intervention?
Considering resource use in empirical software engineering. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement (ESEM ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/2961111.2962631
[2] Pablo Alonso-Coello, Andrew D. Oxman, Jenny Moberg, Romina Brignardello-
Petersen, Elie A. Akl, Marina Davoli, Shaun Treweek, Reem A. Mustafa, Per O.
Vandvik, Joerg Meerpohl, Gordon H. Guyatt, Holger J. Schünemann, and the
GRADE Working Group. 2016. GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a
systematic and transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices.
2: Clinical practice guidelines. BMJ 353 (June 2016), i2089. doi:10.1136/bmj.i2089
Publisher: British Medical Journal Publishing Group Section: Research Methods
&amp; Reporting.
[3] Pablo Alonso-Coello, Holger J. Schünemann, Jenny Moberg, Romina Brignardello-
Petersen, Elie A. Akl, Marina Davoli, Shaun Treweek, Reem A. Mustafa, Gabriel
Rada, Sarah Rosenbaum, Angela Morelli, Gordon H. Guyatt, Andrew D. Oxman,
and the GRADE Working Group. 2016. GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD)
frameworks: a systematic and transparent approach to making well informed
healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 353 (June 2016), i2016. doi:10.1136/bmj.
i2016 Publisher: British Medical Journal Publishing Group Section: Research
Methods &amp; Reporting.
[4] Jeffrey C. Andrews, Holger J. Schünemann, Andrew D. Oxman, Kevin Pottie, Jo-
erg J. Meerpohl, Pablo Alonso Coello, David Rind, Victor M. Montori, Juan Pablo
Brito, Susan Norris, Mahmoud Elbarbary, Piet Post, Mona Nasser, Vijay Shukla,
Roman Jaeschke, Jan Brozek, Ben Djulbegovic, and Gordon Guyatt. 2013. GRADE