Intrinsic Stability Limits of Autoregressive Reasoning: Structural Consequences
for Long-Horizon Execution

Hsien-Jyh Liao1*

Abstract

ReAct [4] and Reflexion [5]. These approaches are often in-
terpreted as instances of deliberate or “System 2” reason-
ing [6], where intermediate reasoning steps are explicitly
generated to enhance deliberation and planning.
Despite these advances, an important limitation remains
insufficiently formalized. As reasoning sequences grow
longer, the stability of reasoning trajectories frequently de-
grades, even when the underlying task structure does not
significantly increase in complexity. Model outputs may ex-
hibit logical drift, internal inconsistency, or contradictions
with earlier intermediate conclusions. This observation sug-
gests that the central challenge of generative reasoning is not
merely whether reasoning can be completed, but whether it
can be stably sustained over extended horizons.
Existing explanations typically attribute long-horizon rea-
soning failures to task-level complexity, such as combinato-
rial search explosion, long-term credit assignment difficul-
ties, or accumulating semantic ambiguity. These perspec-
tives align with classical analyses in planning and reinforce-
ment learning, where long-horizon challenges are framed as
consequences of large state or policy spaces [7, 8]. Within
language model research, many recent approaches attempt
to mitigate such issues through structured reasoning strate-
gies or external scaffolding mechanisms [1, 2, 3]. However,
these explanations implicitly assume that once task structure
is properly managed, the reasoning process itself can be ex-
tended arbitrarily.
For autoregressive generative systems, this assumption
has not been rigorously examined. If reasoning is viewed as
a dynamical process that evolves over time while accumulat-
ing internal uncertainty, an alternative hypothesis emerges:
long-horizon reasoning failure may arise from intrinsic in-
stability in the execution process itself rather than solely
from task complexity. Prior work on neural text generation
has identified degeneration phenomena related to sequence
continuation [9], yet a formal account of stability limits in
extended reasoning trajectories remains largely unexplored.
While scaling laws capture aggregate performance
trends [10], they largely remain silent on the structural sta-
bility properties of extended reasoning execution. We there-
fore propose a complementary perspective: long-horizon
reasoning should be analyzed as a stability problem of se-
quential execution dynamics rather than purely as a scaling
or search problem.

arXiv:2602.06413v1 [cs.AI] 6 Feb 2026

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate remarkable rea-
soning capabilities, yet their performance often deteriorates
sharply in long-horizon tasks, exhibiting systematic break-
down beyond certain scales. Conventional explanations pri-
marily attribute this phenomenon to task complexity, such as
combinatorial search explosion or long-term credit assign-
ment challenges. In this work, we argue that these explana-
tions are incomplete: even in linear, unbranched tasks without
semantic ambiguity, autoregressive execution is subject to an
intrinsic stability limit.
We propose that the fundamental constraint on long-horizon
reasoning arises from process-level instability in autoregres-
sive generation rather than solely from search or task com-
plexity, reframing long-horizon reasoning as a problem of
structural governance. We derive Theorem A, showing that
decision advantage in single-path autoregressive reasoning
decays exponentially with execution length, imposing a fun-
damental bound on maintainable reasoning chains. This re-
sult implies a structural consequence: stable long-horizon
reasoning requires discrete segmentation, naturally induc-
ing graph-like execution structures such as directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs).
Empirical studies in both synthetic environments and real
TextWorld tasks reveal observable performance cliffs con-
sistent with theoretical predictions. Our findings provide a
dynamical perspective on long-horizon reasoning failure and
suggest new limitations on maintaining long-term coherence
under purely autoregressive architectures. Furthermore, we
highlight that short-horizon evaluation protocols may obscure
structural instability, indicating a potential shift from scaling
toward structured governance in future reasoning systems.

Keywords: Autoregressive Reasoning Long-Horizon Sta-
bility Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Information-Theoretic
Analysis Structured Reasoning Inference Dynamics

1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remark-
able capabilities across a wide range of reasoning tasks. For
example, advanced models achieve strong performance on
mathematical reasoning benchmarks when guided by struc-
tured prompting strategies such as chain-of-thought prompt-
ing [1], tree-of-thought reasoning [2], graph-based reason-
ing frameworks [3], and agent-style paradigms including

*These authors contributed equally.

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have led
to a surge of techniques designed to explicitly guide reason-
ing processes. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting encour-
ages models to generate intermediate reasoning steps, sig-
nificantly improving performance on arithmetic and logical
tasks [1]. Subsequent approaches such as Tree-of-Thought
(ToT) introduce branching exploration and backtracking
mechanisms to evaluate multiple reasoning candidates [2],
while related frameworks combine reasoning and acting in
interactive environments [4].
A common characteristic of these methods is the intro-
duction of structure at the semantic level, aiming to improve
output quality through explicit intermediate representations.
Nevertheless, most existing work implicitly treats reasoning
as an autoregressive sequence that can be extended indef-
initely. The physical or informational constraints governing
the stability of long reasoning trajectories remain largely un-
formalized. Consequently, even semantically coherent inter-
mediate steps may lead to logical drift or inconsistency as
reasoning depth increases.
Our perspective does not challenge the empirical effec-
tiveness of CoT or ToT. Instead, we argue that their suc-
cess implicitly relies on segmentation and reset mechanisms
within the reasoning process. In our framework, this phe-
nomenon emerges as a structural constraint on edge length
within a reasoning graph, supported by an information-
theoretic analysis.

2
Related Work

This chapter reviews prior research related to long-horizon
reasoning, structured reasoning, and dialogue-oriented sys-
tems, positioning our work within the broader research land-
scape. We organize related studies into four categories: (1)
long-horizon decision making and exponential difficulty, (2)
chain-based reasoning methods in large language models,
(3) structured and graph-based reasoning frameworks, and
(4) computational argumentation and dialogue systems.
Our perspective does not seek to replace existing ap-
proaches, but instead addresses a level that has received
comparatively limited formal treatment: the dynamical sta-
bility of the generative reasoning process itself.

2.1
Long-Horizon Decision Making and
Exponential Difficulty

2.3
Structured Reasoning and Graph-Based
Representations

In reinforcement learning (RL) and partially observable
Markov decision processes (POMDPs), the difficulty of
long-horizon tasks has been extensively studied. Classical
results demonstrate that, in the absence of informative inter-
mediate signals or identifiable states, the sample complex-
ity required for learning or planning can grow exponentially
with decision depth [7]. Such exponential growth is typi-
cally attributed to combinatorial explosion in state or policy
spaces, where the number of feasible trajectories increases
rapidly over time.
To mitigate these challenges, the RL literature has in-
troduced various approaches, including temporal abstrac-
tion and the options framework [8], which reduce effec-
tive decision depth through macro-actions or hierarchical
decomposition. However, these methods primarily interpret
long-horizon difficulty through the lens of search complex-
ity or policy representation. They generally do not analyze
how uncertainty accumulates dynamically when a genera-
tive model repeatedly performs autoregressive updates along
a single execution trajectory.
Theorem A proposed in this work exhibits mathematically
similar exponential behavior, but differs fundamentally in
interpretation. Rather than attributing failure to the prolif-
eration of possible paths, we show that collapse can arise
even in strictly linear settings without branching, due to cu-
mulative noise within the autoregressive generative process
itself.

Another line of research represents reasoning as graph
structures, such as directed graphs or directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs), to explicitly model dependencies between
states, subproblems, or intermediate conclusions. These ap-
proaches have been applied in planning, program synthe-
sis, and knowledge reasoning, where complex tasks are de-
composed into manageable components. Recent work such
as Graph-of-Thoughts extends this paradigm by organizing
reasoning as structured graph traversal [3].
However, many structured reasoning methods assume that
nodes correspond to stable, randomly accessible represen-
tations. In generative models, by contrast, such nodes are
themselves produced through sequential autoregressive pro-
cesses and are therefore constrained by limited context ca-
pacity and accumulated uncertainty. Existing graph-based
reasoning frameworks primarily model structure at the se-
mantic or symbolic level, without addressing the dynamical
limitations inherent in the generation process.
In our formulation, the DAG is not merely a representa-
tional abstraction but a topological consequence of stabil-
ity constraints. Edges correspond to bounded segments of
autoregressive execution, while nodes correspond to nec-
essary operations of state consolidation and informational
compression.

Recent research has also explored the integration of com-
putational argumentation into dialogue systems, formaliz-
ing relationships between claims, rebuttals, and supporting
evidence. Argumentation-based conversational agents offer
potential advantages in interpretability and non-monotonic
reasoning, and can be combined with Transformer architec-
tures [11] to enhance dialogue quality.
However, this line of work primarily focuses on structur-
ing reasoning content rather than analyzing the stability of
long generative trajectories. Even if argument structures are
logically valid at an abstract level, their generation may still
suffer from instability when executed as extended autore-
gressive sequences. Thus, computational argumentation and
our framework operate at complementary levels: the former
addresses semantic representation and evaluation, whereas
the latter addresses whether reasoning execution can be sus-
tained dynamically under information-theoretic constraints.

• No cross-episode learning or policy updates are involved;
• Questions of policy optimality or search efficiency are
outside the scope of analysis;
• The central inquiry is whether the execution of reason-
ing can stably maintain directional alignment toward the
correct objective as the trajectory length increases.
This perspective complements the analysis presented in
Appendix A. While Appendix A studies learning-theoretic
sample complexity in sparse long-horizon tasks (TW-HSFε),
demonstrating exponential growth in required samples when
identifiable structural signals are absent, the present chapter
focuses on a different question: even assuming learning has
been completed and the reasoning policy is fixed, can a sin-
gle execution trajectory maintain its reliability as the reason-
ing horizon extends?

2.5
Summary

In summary, prior work has proposed numerous meth-
ods for improving long-horizon reasoning through search
strategies, semantic guidance, structured representations, or
argumentation theory. Nevertheless, the intrinsic stability
limits of autoregressive generation remain underexplored.
Through Theorem A and the subsequent DAG-based reason-
ing framework, this work aims to fill this gap by providing
a process-level analysis grounded in information theory and
dynamical systems perspectives, offering a structural inter-
pretation of “System 2” reasoning behaviors [6].

3.2
Decision Advantage and Noise Accumulation
We characterize the directionality of a reasoning trajectory
from an information-theoretic perspective. Let G denote the
target proposition (the correct conclusion), and ¬G its nega-
tion. We define Zt as the internal latent state of the model
at step t, which encapsulates the accumulated context and
implicit representations up to that point.
Definition 1 (Decision Advantage). The decision advantage
at step t, denoted by ρt ∈[−1, 1], is defined as:

ρt ≜P(G | Zt) −P(¬G | Zt).
(1)
A positive value ρt > 0 indicates that the model remains
directionally aligned with the target objective. Conversely,
ρt ≈0 signifies a loss of effective directionality, where the
model enters a regime of high uncertainty or ”hallucination,”
making correct recovery increasingly improbable.
We model the autoregressive update as a stochastic dy-
namical process:
Zt+1 = f(Zt) + εt,
(2)
where
f
represents
the
ideal
transition
function
of
the reasoning policy, and εt denotes the accumulated
noise—comprising approximation errors, sampling vari-
ance, and representational decay.
The central premise of our analysis is that in long-
horizon sequences, these perturbations εt typically accumu-
late rather than cancel out, leading to a monotonic erosion
of the decision advantage.

3
Process-Level Stability Limits of
Long-Horizon Autoregressive Reasoning
(Theorem A)

This chapter addresses a question that has remained largely
implicit in prior work: without introducing any structural
interruption, can an autoregressive reasoning trajectory be
stably extended in an information-theoretic sense?
Most existing approaches to long-horizon reasoning focus
on mitigating task-level difficulties—search complexity, se-
mantic structure, or proof formats—and implicitly assume
that once the reasoning content is properly guided, the exe-
cution process can be prolonged as needed. For autoregres-
sive language models, however, reasoning does not unfold
over a static, randomly accessible state. Instead, it is realized
through a sequential execution process whose implicit state
evolves over time while accumulating uncertainty. Even in
linear tasks without branching search, backtracking, or se-
mantic ambiguity, it remains unclear whether such an exe-
cution process can be extended indefinitely.
In what follows, we show that long-horizon autoregres-
sive reasoning is subject to intrinsic stability limits even
under highly simplified conditions: no search branching, a
known policy, and minimal task structure. We formalize this
phenomenon as Theorem A, and in Section 3.5 discuss its
direct structural consequences for reasoning topology.

3.3
Theorem A: Process Collapse in
Long-Horizon Autoregressive Reasoning
We analyze long-horizon autoregressive reasoning under a
set of idealized structural assumptions. The following result
should be interpreted as a structural stability theorem under
contraction-like dynamics, rather than a tight characteriza-
tion of any specific model architecture.

reset

Z0
Z1
Z2
Z′
0
Z′
1
Z′
2

Z0
Z1
Z2
Z3
ZL

ρ(L) ≤ρ0e−γL

Break history dependence and suppress accumulation

Each segment satisfies: ℓi < L∗

Directionality (decision advantage) decays with length

L > L∗implies ρ < τ

Figure 1: A process-level view of degradation in autoregressive reasoning. Even in linear tasks without branching search,
a single long execution edge exhibits exponential decay of decision advantage due to accumulated uncertainty; in contrast,
segmentation with resets suppresses accumulation, keeping each segment within a stable regime.

• Finite representational capacity. The internal state ad-
mits bounded informational precision, preventing loss-
less accumulation of arbitrarily long histories.
• Persistent stochastic perturbations. Each autoregres-
sive update introduces non-zero uncertainty, arising from
approximation error, sampling noise, or representational
aliasing.
• Single-path execution. Reasoning proceeds along a
fixed trajectory without branching search, external reset
mechanisms, or explicit backtracking.
• Absence of structural grounding. Intermediate states
lack external structural signals capable of fully eliminat-
ing accumulated uncertainty.

distance. Persistent stochastic perturbations imply that the
induced Markov operator exhibits contraction:

∆t+1 ≤η ∆t,
(6)

where η < 1 reflects cumulative uncertainty introduced at
each autoregressive step. Iterating yields

∆t ≤ηt∆0.
(7)

Since the decision advantage ρt is bounded by distribu-
tional distinguishability, i.e.,

ρt ≤∆t,
(8)

we obtain exponential decay:

These assumptions capture common constraints in practi-
cal autoregressive reasoning systems rather than properties
of any specific model architecture.
We model the reasoning dynamics as a stochastic autore-
gressive process:

ρt ≤ρ0e−γt.
(9)

Detailed derivations and alternative formulations based on
entropy accumulation are provided in Appendix A.3. The
contraction assumption is not derived here but serves as an
idealized abstraction capturing cumulative uncertainty ef-
fects in autoregressive execution.

Zt+1 ∼K(· | Zt),
(3)

where K denotes the induced transition kernel governing
state evolution.
Theorem 1 (Process Collapse in Long-Horizon Autoregres-
sive Reasoning). Under mild contraction assumptions on
the autoregressive transition kernel, suppose the stochastic
transition kernel admits a contraction coefficient η < 1 in
total variation distance. Then the decision advantage along
a single-path reasoning trajectory of length L satisfies

Dynamical interpretation.
The exponential decay bound
reflects a contraction-like behavior in decision advantage
under noisy autoregressive dynamics. Persistent perturba-
tions progressively reduce directional information, implying
that sufficiently long single-path execution inevitably ap-
proaches a high-uncertainty regime even in the absence of
branching complexity.

ρ(L) ≤ρ0e−γL,
(4)

3.4
Distinction from Problem-Complexity Lower
Bounds
In classical reinforcement learning and planning frame-
works, long-horizon failure is predominantly attributed to
problem complexity. For instance, search spaces expand ex-
ponentially with branching factor b, leading to exploration
and credit-assignment challenges that scale as bL. Within
this paradigm, reasoning failure is primarily interpreted as
a consequence of combinatorial explosion.
In contrast, Theorem A identifies an orthogonal source of
failure:

where γ = −ln η > 0 and ρ0 denotes the initial decision
advantage.
Consequently, there exists a critical length

L∗= 1

γ ln ρ0

τ ,
(5)

such that for L > L∗the decision advantage falls below a
reliability threshold τ, beyond which directional inference
becomes unstable.

Proof sketch.
Let ∆t denote the distinguishability be-
tween state distributions conditioned on correct versus in-
correct reasoning trajectories, measured in total variation

• When b = 1 (i.e., purely linear tasks), search complexity
effectively vanishes;

L∗

Therefore, long-horizon reasoning difficulty cannot be
fully explained by problem complexity alone. Even in tasks
where the branching factor equals one, autoregressive exe-
cution remains subject to intrinsic process-level instability.
This theoretical distinction is further supported by the Chain
Sensitivity analysis in Section 5, which provides empirical
evidence for the existence of a process-level bottleneck.

0.5

τ

0
20
40
60

Reasoning length L

3.5
Structural Consequence: Why Stable
Reasoning Requires Discretization

Figure 2: Conceptual phase transition induced by intrin-
sic stability limits. Decision advantage decays exponentially
and crosses the critical threshold at L∗.

The direct implication of Theorem A is not the fundamental
impossibility of long-horizon reasoning, but rather the in-
feasibility of sustaining it through an indefinitely extended
single linear autoregressive trajectory.
As established by Theorem A, once the reasoning length
L exceeds the critical scale L∗, the decision advantage ρ(L)
falls below the threshold τ required for reliable logical dis-
crimination. If reasoning continues along a single trajectory,
the process inevitably enters a regime characterized by dissi-
pation of directional information and increasing dominance
of stochastic noise.
To avoid such process-level collapse, reasoning execution
must admit a partition into discrete segments such that each
continuous autoregressive edge ℓi remains within the stable
regime:
ℓi < L∗.
(10)

L∗is characterized by the intrinsic decay rate γ and the ini-
tial decision advantage ρ0:

γ ln ρ0

L∗= 1

τ .
(11)

This result allows the sustainability of reasoning trajec-
tories to be interpreted as an intrinsic dynamical property
rather than purely an empirical observation. Concretely, γ
captures the average rate at which goal-relevant information
dissipates during autoregressive updates, while ρ0 reflects
the initial directional clarity of the process. Together, they
define a fundamental stability horizon. When the reasoning
length L approaches or exceeds L∗, process-level instabil-
ity dominates, driving the system toward a high-uncertainty
regime even in tasks with minimal structural complexity.
From this perspective, L∗serves as a stability ruler for
autoregressive inference. Moving beyond retrospective ex-
planation, it offers a principled criterion for anticipating po-
tential failure points of single-path execution under specific
model and task configurations.
Importantly, the introduction of L∗also suggests struc-
tural constraints on stabilization strategies: to sustain coher-
ent long-horizon reasoning, mechanisms must ensure that
elementary reasoning segments remain below this critical
scale. This insight provides a theoretical foundation for rein-
terpreting and optimizing structured reasoning paradigms.

This constraint implies a structural transformation: sta-
ble long-horizon reasoning can no longer be represented as
a monolithic linear chain. Instead, it evolves into multiple
finite-length edges interconnected by stabilizing nodes that
perform state consolidation or informational reset. Topolog-
ically, these requirements naturally correspond to DAG-like
structures.
Importantly, this discretization is not merely an engineer-
ing preference but emerges as a structural consequence of
maintaining stability under autoregressive dynamics. In this
framework, DAG-like reasoning structures arise as a natural
organizational form shaped by informational stability con-
straints.

3.6
Critical Length L∗as a Diagnostic Scale for
Reasoning Stability

3.7
Summary
In this chapter, we characterized long-horizon autoregres-
sive reasoning as a dynamical process and established the
existence of an intrinsic process-level instability. We demon-
strated that even in the absence of branching complexity,
the decision advantage decays exponentially with reasoning
length, leading to the emergence of a fundamental stability
horizon, L∗.
This result implies a structural requirement: stable long-
horizon reasoning cannot be sustained through a monolithic,
uninterrupted trajectory. To preserve logical coherence, rea-
soning execution must admit a partition into discrete seg-
ments such that each continuous edge ℓi satisfies the stabil-

Existing literature frequently characterizes long-horizon
reasoning failure through qualitative observations, such as
coherence degradation, increased hallucination, or logical
drift. While these descriptions capture empirical phenom-
ena, they lack a predictive framework and do not address the
precise boundary conditions under which failure becomes
inevitable.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the decision advantage crosses
the critical threshold at L∗, marking the onset of instability.
Theorem A addresses this gap by introducing the critical
length L∗, which provides a quantitative diagnostic scale for
reasoning stability. Derived from our analysis in Section 3,

This constraint provides the theoretical basis for tran-
sitioning from linear chains toward structured graph-like
representations. In the following chapter, we expand this
framework by examining the functional roles of reason-
ing nodes—specifically their capacity for state consolidation
and entropy regulation. We further analyze how node-based
operations suppress the accumulation of historical uncer-
tainty, enabling reliable reasoning beyond the critical scale
L∗.

4
Inference Segmentation Necessity and
Structural Implications
This chapter synthesizes the theoretical foundations of The-
orem A (Chapter 3) with the empirical findings presented
in Chapter 5, establishing a unified structural framework for
understanding long-horizon reasoning.
We contend that the failure of long-horizon reasoning
cannot be attributed solely to problem complexity. Beyond
the conventional focus on combinatorial search or credit-
assignment challenges, intrinsic stability limits—arising
from the dynamics of autoregressive execution—play a fun-
damental role. From this perspective, structured reasoning
techniques such as Chain-of-Thought [1], Tree-of-Thought
[2], and Graph-of-Thought [3], traditionally introduced as
heuristic improvements, can instead be interpreted as struc-
tural responses to stability constraints. Structural segmen-
tation and reset mechanisms therefore emerge not merely as
engineering choices, but as necessary conditions for prevent-
ing process-level collapse.
By integrating rigorous theoretical analysis with empir-
ical validation, we examine how these stability constraints
shape the structural requirements of reasoning execution.
This analysis motivates a transition in reasoning architec-
tures: moving away from monolithic linear trajectories to-
ward segmented, topology-aware configurations capable of
sustaining coherence over extended horizons.

This taxonomy underscores that the feasibility of long-
horizon reasoning is governed not only by task difficulty but
also by the intrinsic stability of the execution process. Con-
sequently, addressing problem complexity through search or
scaling alone is insufficient to guarantee sustained reasoning
performance in extended horizons.

4.2
Topology Under Critical Edge-Length
Constraints (DAG as a Canonical Realization)
Theorem A in Chapter 3 establishes that a single autoregres-
sive reasoning edge possesses an intrinsic critical length L∗
determined by the exponential decay rate of decision advan-
tage. Empirical results in Chapter 5 further demonstrate that
structured segmentation and reset mechanisms shift the ef-
fective failure scale from the global reasoning horizon to lo-
cal segment lengths. Taken together, these findings suggest
that reasoning processes aiming to maintain stability over
extended horizons must avoid unbounded single-path exten-
sion.
Consequently, under the stability constraints defined in
Chapter 3, any robust reasoning topology must satisfy

ℓi < L∗,
(13)

for each reasoning edge ℓi. Violating this condition drives
the system toward a high-uncertainty regime as decision
advantage decays beyond the stability threshold. This con-
straint introduces a minimum density of stabilization
nodes along the reasoning horizon, motivating a transition
from monolithic linear trajectories toward structured graph-
based representations observed in prior structured reasoning
approaches such as Chain-of-Thought [1], Tree-of-Thought
[2], and Graph-of-Thought [3].
From a topological perspective, directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) provide a canonical realization of structures that sat-
isfy local stability constraints while preserving global reach-
ability. In this framework:

4.1
Failure Mode Taxonomy for Long-Horizon
Reasoning
Based on the theoretical and empirical findings of this study,
failures in long-horizon reasoning can be organized into
three mutually orthogonal sources:

1. Problem
Complexity
(Combinatorial
Explosion).
When the branching factor b of a task scales with the rea-
soning horizon L, the required computational and sample
complexity increases exponentially (bL). Our synthetic
Track B experiments and the analysis in Appendix A
illustrate this classical lower bound. The origin of this
failure mode lies in the combinatorial explosion of feasi-
ble trajectories, a phenomenon extensively documented
in planning and reinforcement learning literature [7, 8].
2. Process Instability (Information-Theoretic Decay).
Critically, even in strictly linear settings (b = 1), long-
horizon autoregressive execution accumulates internal
decision noise and residual uncertainty. As demonstrated

• Edges correspond to finite-length autoregressive execu-
tion segments constrained by ℓi < L∗;
• Vertices correspond to stabilization points where state
consolidation, compression, or reset operations occur;
• Acyclicity prevents recursive amplification of historical
uncertainty through closed feedback loops.

Within this interpretation, nodes function as informational
anchors analogous to information bottlenecks [13]. Their

rt = t −tlast reset

L∗
.
(16)

For instance, when rt > 0.8, single-path reasoning enters a
highly unstable regime in which attempts to maintain con-
sistency solely by extending the sequence are likely to fail
rapidly.
Together, these indicators define a computable critical re-
gion. When any two exceed their respective thresholds, the
reasoning process can be interpreted as entering a high-
instability regime. Importantly, these quantities are not pro-
posed as control mechanisms or precise measurement tools;
rather, they function as diagnostic signals for identifying
when linear reasoning approaches a dynamically unsustain-
able region.
Under this interpretation, existing “slow-thinking” tech-
niques can be reframed as different responses to the criti-
cal scale L∗. Chain-of-Thought prompting [1] primarily de-
lays collapse by introducing semantic constraints that effec-
tively reduce the decay rate γ. However, because the un-
derlying topology remains linear, collapse becomes increas-
ingly likely as rt →1. In contrast, Tree-of-Thought ap-
proaches [2] introduce explicit branching or structural inter-
vention before the critical boundary is crossed, effectively
partitioning reasoning into segments satisfying ℓi < L∗.
Consequently, within this framework, System 2 behav-
ior emerges not as an ad hoc engineering heuristic but as
a quantifiable structural response to the critical length L∗.
The diagnostic quantities (γt, ∆Ht, rt) primarily serve as
interpretive tools bridging theory and empirical observation.
Precise numerical estimation and large-scale operational de-
ployment remain important directions for future work.

4.3
Quantitative Structural Interpretation of
System-2 Behavior: From Heuristic
Techniques to Critical Response
In psychology and artificial intelligence literature, “Sys-
tem 2” reasoning is commonly used to describe slow, de-
liberate, and reflective cognitive processes [6]. Despite its
widespread adoption, System 2 behavior has largely been
treated as a qualitative phenomenon, lacking a unified quan-
titative explanation regarding when and why such behavior
emerges.
Within the framework developed in this work, System 2
behavior can be reinterpreted as a structural response aris-
ing when a single-path reasoning trajectory approaches the
critical scale L∗. As linear autoregressive execution nears
this intrinsic stability limit, maintaining decision advantage
requires structural adaptation. From this perspective, Sys-
tem 2 is not merely a cognitive style but can be understood
as a form of structural phase transition that occurs when
linear reasoning approaches its stability boundary.
To characterize this critical response, we introduce
three complementary but non-essential diagnostic quanti-
ties. These correspond respectively to dynamical degrada-
tion, critical transition signals, and structural scale con-
straints, forming a multi-scale diagnostic framework span-
ning dynamical and topological levels.

4.4
Scope and Limitations
To ensure theoretical rigor and avoid overgeneralization, we
explicitly delineate the scope and boundary conditions of the
present work:

1. Node Generation and Algorithmic Optimization. This
study characterizes the functional necessity of stabiliza-
tion nodes but does not prescribe specific algorithms for
their automated generation or optimization. The mecha-
nisms governing adaptive segmentation or optimal node
placement remain compelling directions for future re-
search.
2. Optimality of Segmentation Strategies. Our analysis
establishes the structural necessity of segmentation and
reset mechanisms for maintaining informational stability.
However, we do not investigate the mathematical opti-
mality of particular segmentation policies or the associ-
ated computational overhead of frequent state consolida-
tion.
3. Generalization Beyond Single-Agent Autoregressive
Execution. While scenarios involving multi-agent col-
laboration, tool invocation, or external memory architec-
tures may be conceptually congruent with the proposed
framework, such extensions remain beyond the scope of
this foundational study.

(1) Decision Advantage Decay Rate.

γt = −1

t ln ρt

ρ0
.
(14)

When γt significantly exceeds the intrinsic decay rate γ, it
indicates accelerated loss of directional information, sug-
gesting that the reasoning trajectory is approaching its sta-
bility limit.

(2) Conditional Entropy Spike Indicator.

∆Ht = H(Xt+1 | Ht) −H(Xt+1 | T (Ht, s∗)).
(15)

When ∆Ht exceeds its typical background distribution, ac-
cumulated historical noise begins to dominate predictive ca-
pacity, implying diminishing or even negative marginal re-
turns from extending the reasoning trajectory.

4.5
Summary
By synthesizing the theoretical analysis of Chapter 3 with
the structural framework developed in this chapter, we ar-
rive at a rigorous conclusion: if long-horizon reasoning re-
lies on the continuous extension of a single autoregressive
trajectory, its stability is inherently bounded by a critical
length L∗under the stated assumptions. Any strategy that
attempts to extend reasoning indefinitely without structural
intervention will ultimately lead to the collapse of decision
advantage. Consequently, the transition from linear chains
toward DAG-like or graph-structured execution—featuring
bounded edge lengths and stabilization nodes—should be
understood not merely as an engineering heuristic, but as a
structural consequence induced by the dynamics of autore-
gressive instability.
Within this framework, structured reasoning topologies
give rise to a set of empirically testable structural predic-
tions that transcend specific model architectures:
1. Existence of Performance Cliffs: Reasoning perfor-
mance is expected to exhibit sharp degradation once
single-path execution approaches the critical scale L∗;
2. Efficacy of Segmentation: Partitioning execution into
sub-critical edges (ℓi < L∗) and introducing informa-
tional resets should significantly mitigate the decay of
decision advantage;
3. Cross-Domain Consistency: These effects should man-
ifest consistently across synthetic benchmarks, mecha-
nistic analyses, and complex interactive environments,
largely independent of semantic complexity or specific
task formulations.
Chapter 5 is explicitly designed to validate these struc-
tural predictions. Rather than discovering structure through
empirical observation alone, we employ targeted evaluations
to test necessary conditions derived from theoretical analy-
sis. Through complementary experiments—including syn-
thetic long-horizon tasks, branch-free chain sensitivity anal-
ysis, and TextWorld benchmarks [12]—we demonstrate that
adherence to these structural constraints plays a critical role
in sustaining reasoning stability. Conversely, ignoring such
constraints leads to systematic degradation patterns consis-
tent with the instability framework.
In summary, the structural conclusions established here
characterize the necessary conditions for reliable long-
horizon autoregressive inference. While the design of op-
timal or fully operational stabilization mechanisms remains
an open research direction, the requirement for bounded lin-
ear extension establishes a principled structural constraint
that underlies the broader framework of structural gover-
nance developed in this work.

• Track B (Synthetic Tasks): Evaluates the exponential
sample-complexity lower bounds derived in Appendix A.
These experiments demonstrate how structural segmen-
tation shifts the effective computational bottleneck from
the global horizon L to the longest effective sub-critical
edge length ℓmax.
• Chain Sensitivity Analysis (Mechanistic Study): Iso-
lates collapse behavior arising purely from process in-
stability within a branch-free environment. By eliminat-
ing search complexity and semantic ambiguity, this setup
provides a controlled evaluation of the exponential decay
predicted by Theorem A.
• Track A (TextWorld Environments): Examines struc-
tural governance mechanisms in interactive language-
based environments [12], assessing whether topology-
aware reasoning structures improve forward progress and
suppress oscillatory behaviors under realistic conditions.

Within the diagnostic framework, we utilize three quan-
titative indicators to characterize critical behavior: decision
advantage decay (γt), conditional entropy spikes (∆Ht), and
the effective edge-length ratio (rt). These quantities are not
proposed as optimization objectives or control variables;
rather, they function as observational instruments for de-
tecting when reasoning trajectories approach the instability
regime predicted by Theorem A.
The primary objective of this evaluation is therefore not
the direct numerical validation of these indicators, but to as-
sess whether reasoning behavior exhibits dynamical patterns
consistent with theoretical predictions. Specifically, we ex-
amine:

1. exponential-scale transitions in synthetic long-horizon
tasks;
2. entropy-driven collapse phenomena in branch-free linear
chains;
3. improved stability in interactive environments when rea-
soning segments are constrained below the critical scale
L∗.

5
Experimental Evaluation
This chapter presents a set of complementary experiments
designed to empirically examine the central thesis intro-

Under this diagnostic lens, the experimental results pre-
sented in the following sections should be understood as em-

Capped at 3 × 105

Unstructured (Baseline)
Structured (Landmarks)
Theoretical Reference (hmax)

Median Episodes-to-Success

105

5.1
Track B: Sample Complexity Analysis in
Synthetic Long-Horizon Tasks
5.1.1
Experimental Setup
Guided by the theoretical framework of the TextWorld Hard
Sparse Family (TW-HSFε) defined in Appendix A, we con-
struct a synthetic long-horizon task environment designed
to isolate the structural bottleneck of sparse reasoning. The
environment enables high-throughput sampling while pre-
serving the essential property that success requires the exact
execution of a unique action sequence of length L. Any de-
viation collapses the trajectory into failure, and no interme-
diate feedback is provided.
Under the unstructured baseline, the success probability
per episode is analytically characterized by

104

103

102

6
8
10
12
14
101

Horizon Length L

Figure 3: Track B: Exponential bottleneck transfer un-
der structural segmentation. Median episodes-to-success
(log scale) as a function of horizon length L for unstructured
(blue) and structured / landmark-based (orange) agents in
the synthetic TW-HSF setting. The dashed curve shows the
theoretical reference scale dominated by the longest effec-
tive segment length hmax. Without structure, sample com-
plexity grows exponentially in L, consistent with the |A|L
lower bound (Appendix A). Structural segmentation recon-
figures the exponential scaling regime, shifting the domi-
nant dependence from the full horizon L to the longest sub-
critical segment hmax. Increasing landmark omission prob-
ability (not shown) increases hmax and restores the high-
exponent scaling regime, confirming that structure functions
primarily by constraining the uninterrupted autoregressive
span rather than by providing additional semantic informa-
tion.

p = |A|−L,
(17)

where |A| denotes the action space size. Consequently, the
episodes-to-success follow a geometric distribution whose
expected value grows exponentially with L, consistent with
the theoretical lower bound derived in Appendix A.
In the structured condition (Landmarks), the global
horizon L is partitioned into K subsegments (ℓ1, . . . , ℓK),
each independently solvable. To simulate imperfect struc-
tural signals, we introduce a landmark omission probabil-
ity pdrop, whereby failed landmark detection stochastically
merges adjacent segments, thereby increasing the effective
uninterrupted reasoning span and raising the longest effec-
tive segment length hmax.

5.1.2
Results and Analysis
The experimental results reveal three consistent trends.
First, under the unstructured condition, sample complex-
ity exhibits exponential growth as the horizon length L in-
creases. The empirical slope closely matches the theoreti-
cal lower bound proportional to |A|L, providing empirical
support for the analysis of TW-HSF-type tasks presented in
Appendix A.
Second, structural segmentation fundamentally alters the
scaling regime. By partitioning the reasoning trajectory, the
dominant exponential dependence shifts from the global
horizon L to the longest effective subsegment length hmax.
Rather than reducing constant factors, structure modifies the
governing exponential scale itself, effectively localizing the
curse of horizon to sub-critical segments.
Third, sensitivity to the landmark omission probability
pdrop demonstrates that the primary role of structural sig-
nals is the truncation of autoregressive dependency. As land-
marks fail and segments merge, the effective reasoning span
increases, and the sample complexity rapidly returns toward
the unstructured exponential regime.
From the perspective of the diagnostic framework intro-
duced in Section 4.3, the exponential degradation observed
in the unstructured condition corresponds to a dynamical
regime dominated by sustained decay of decision advan-
tage, characterized by elevated γt. Structural segmentation

enforces resets that interrupt the exponential decay regime
predicted by Theorem A, preventing the reasoning trajec-
tory from approaching the critical scale L∗where instability
becomes dominant.

5.2
Chain Sensitivity Analysis: Process Stability
in a Branch-Free Environment
5.2.1
Motivation and Setup
To rigorously distinguish between failures arising from
problem complexity and those induced by process instabil-
ity, we construct a fully branch-free one-dimensional task
environment. The state space is defined as {0, 1, . . . , L},
where the sole objective is to advance from state 0 to L.
The branching factor is fixed at b = 1, thereby eliminating
search space explosion and isolating the intrinsic dynamics
of autoregressive execution, consistent with classical plan-
ning formulations [7, 8].
Within this environment, we introduce two controlled
sources of stochastic disturbance:

1. Policy Noise: with probability ϵ, the intended forward
action is reversed into a backward step.

Distinct rooms visited

A structured agent is additionally implemented, perform-
ing periodic phase resets every K steps to prevent long-term
accumulation of backward drift. Such resets are conceptu-
ally related to structured reasoning frameworks that intro-
duce intermediate checkpoints or branching control [2, 3].
This setup allows us to examine whether long-horizon
collapse emerges even when traditional sources of complex-
ity—such as combinatorial branching or semantic ambigu-
ity—are entirely absent.

20

0

0
20
40
60
80

Interaction steps

5.3
Track A: Real LLM Behavior in TextWorld
Environments
5.3.1
Experimental Design
To evaluate whether the structural constraints derived from
Theorem A manifest in real interactive environments, we
conduct experiments in the TextWorld navigation frame-
work [12]. Unlike synthetic settings, this environment in-
troduces realistic challenges including partial observability,
historical dependency, and interactive dynamics.
We evaluate two language models: Gemma 3 4B and
GPT-4o. To ensure rigorous and fair comparison, we employ
a paired-and-cached experimental design. Within each
trial, both the baseline agent and the structurally segmented
(Landmarks) agent share identical language model outputs
for the same (room, action set) input. Specifically:

Figure 4: Structural trajectory comparison in Track A.
Baseline execution exhibits early saturation due to oscil-
latory attractors, while structured execution maintains sus-
tained exploration growth.

100

Baseline (Gemma 3 4B)
Landmarks (Gemma 3 4B)

Metric value

50

• Model outputs are cached and reused across both agents;
• Prompts, environment states, and available actions are
strictly identical;
• Behavioral differences arise solely from structural exe-
cution mechanisms.

Rooms
Edges
Backtracks
0

Figure 5: Track A (Gemma 3 4B): Structural governance
under paired-and-cached evaluation. Bars show mean ±
std over paired trials. Structural resets increase exploration
coverage and reduce oscillatory backtracking.

The Landmarks agent introduces two structural gover-
nance mechanisms:

1. Phase-boundary reset: periodic segmentation of rea-
soning trajectories;
2. In-phase edge deduplication: pruning of redundant
transitions within a segment.

The Gemma 3 4B results demonstrate that the baseline
agent frequently becomes trapped in local oscillatory attrac-
tors, resulting in minimal exploration coverage. In contrast,
structural segmentation substantially increases the number
of explored states while reducing redundant backtracking
behavior, suggesting that instability primarily emerges from
execution dynamics rather than differences in model capa-
bility.
The GPT-4o experiments replicate the same qualitative
pattern, indicating that the observed stability gains gener-
alize across distinct model architectures. From the diagnos-
tic perspective introduced in Section 4.3, the baseline con-
dition effectively extends a single autoregressive trajectory,
causing the effective edge-length ratio rt to approach the in-
stability regime predicted by Theorem A. Structural resets
constrain trajectory length, maintaining execution within a
more stable dynamical region.
Overall, these findings provide empirical evidence that
topology-aware structural governance functions as a struc-

No additional semantic information, reward shaping, or
model retraining is applied. Consequently, any observed be-
havioral divergence isolates the effect of reasoning topology
rather than differences in model capability.

5.3.2
Results and Analysis
We present the results in increasing levels of empirical
grounding: first, a trajectory-level visualization illustrating
qualitative dynamics; second, quantitative measurements for
Gemma 3 4B; and third, replication under GPT-4o.
As illustrated in Figure 4, structural segmentation al-
ters the trajectory-level dynamics of exploration. The base-
line execution rapidly saturates, indicating repeated revisi-
tation of a limited subset of states, whereas the landmark-
structured agent maintains continued exploratory growth.
This qualitative pattern suggests that execution topology di-
rectly influences long-horizon stability.

Baseline (GPT-4o)
Landmarks (GPT-4o)

Across
three
complementary
experimental
tracks—synthetic extremes (Track B), mechanistic iso-
lation (Chain Sensitivity Analysis), and real interactive
environments (Track A)—the results collectively confirm
the central theoretical prediction of this work: when rea-
soning is forced to accumulate along a single uninterrupted
autoregressive trajectory, execution inevitably enters an
instability regime. Structural segmentation and reset mech-
anisms therefore emerge not as heuristic enhancements, but
as fundamental prerequisites for preventing process-level
collapse.
Taken together, the observed behavioral patterns align
closely with the diagnostic framework introduced in Sec-
tion 4.3. Rather than representing isolated empirical arti-
facts, long-horizon failure can be interpreted as a structural
phase transition into a dynamical regime characterized by
exponential decision-advantage decay, entropy escalation,
and critical effective edge-length ratios (rt →1). Within this
framework, structural segmentation operates by constraining
trajectory length below the critical scale L∗, thereby pre-
empting entry into the unstable regime predicted by Theo-
rem A.
These findings provide cross-level empirical validation
linking abstract theoretical analysis with observable execu-
tion dynamics. Crucially, structural governance simultane-
ously mitigates classical problem complexity—traditionally
addressed through search or scaling—and suppresses the in-
trinsic process instability arising from autoregressive dy-
namics.
From a structural perspective, the experiments indicate
that reasoning stability is governed less by semantic capabil-
ity or prompt engineering than by the execution topology it-
self. This insight motivates the development of endogenous
reset primitives and structured execution frameworks (e.g.,
SPR-like mechanisms), and suggests a broader shift in long-
horizon reasoning research: from optimizing model scale to-
ward governing the structural organization of inference.

Metric value

50

Rooms
Edges
Backtracks
0

Figure 6: Track A (GPT-4o): Structural governance un-
der paired-and-cached evaluation. Structural resets im-
prove exploration coverage and suppress oscillatory behav-
ior.

turally grounded mechanism for sustaining coherent long-
horizon reasoning in real interactive environments.

5.4
Discussion: Search-based Compensation vs.
Structural Governance

On the Interaction of Branching and Decay.
While our
analysis primarily focuses on linear trajectories in order to
isolate intrinsic process instability, introducing a branching
factor b > 1 (e.g., via Beam Search or Tree-of-Thought [2])
induces a stochastic survival dynamic among multiple can-
didate trajectories.
Under an independence approximation, let ρt denote the
per-step decision advantage for a single trajectory. The ef-
fective survival probability across b parallel branches can be
approximated as:

ˆρt ≈1 −(1 −ρt)b,
(18)

suggesting that branching can delay the onset of observable
failure by increasing the likelihood that at least one trajec-
tory maintains sufficient directional signal.
Importantly, this mechanism does not alter the intrinsic
decay constant γ derived in Theorem A; instead, it compen-
sates for decay through parallel exploration. As established
in Appendix A, however, branching introduces an exponen-
tial sample-complexity penalty (|A|L) with respect to hori-
zon length. Consequently, while branching may extend the
effective operational horizon, it does so at substantial com-
putational cost.
By contrast, structural governance via segmentation and
reset mechanisms avoids this exponential search over-
head by constraining the uninterrupted autoregressive span.
Rather than modifying the intrinsic decay dynamics, seg-
mentation prevents execution from entering the instability
regime associated with critical effective edge-length ratios
(rt →1). This distinction highlights a fundamental trade-
off: search-based methods trade compute for local stability,
whereas topology-based methods ensure global coherence
through structural design.

6
Conclusion and Future Work

This work reframes reasoning from a scaling problem to a
stability-governed dynamical system. We establish that fail-
ures in long-horizon reasoning originate not merely from
task-level complexity, but from intrinsic dynamical instabil-
ity inherent to the autoregressive execution process itself.
From a theoretical perspective, Theorem A establishes
that the decision advantage along a single-path trajectory
inevitably decays, defining a fundamental stability hori-
zon L∗. Complementarily, Appendix A demonstrates that
without structural grounding, long-horizon tasks exhibit ex-
ponential learning complexity in the worst case. Together,
these results suggest that stability constraints arise from the
interaction between information-theoretic degradation and
sequential execution dynamics.
Our analysis further indicates that DAG-like reasoning
topologies should not be viewed as arbitrary architectural
preferences, but as canonical organizational forms that nat-
urally emerge under intrinsic stability constraints. This per-

Phase boundary

Effective segment length ℓ

Instability regime

40

Branching-compensat

20

Finally, this work invites a reconsideration of how reason-
ing systems are evaluated. If L∗represents an intrinsic sta-
bility scale, traditional short-horizon evaluation paradigms
may suffer from a form of sub-critical bias, potentially over-
looking structural instabilities that only emerge beyond lim-
ited interaction depths [14]. Models may demonstrate high
local coherence while remaining structurally unstable over
extended reasoning horizons. From this perspective, future
evaluation frameworks may need to move beyond short-term
behavioral imitation toward analyzing how information is
structured, compressed, and preserved across long temporal
trajectories.
In summary, the challenge of long-horizon reasoning may
not primarily be a question of scaling capability, but one of
structural organization. By reframing long-range reasoning
as a problem of structural governance, this work provides
a principled foundation for the design and analysis of next-
generation reasoning architectures.

Stable regime

2
4
6
8
10
0

Branching factor b

Figure 7: Conceptual phase diagram of long-horizon au-
toregressive reasoning. The phase boundary illustrates the
trade-off between branching factor b and effective segment
length ℓ. While increased branching delays failure by im-
proving trajectory survival probability, intrinsic decay im-
poses a logarithmic limit. Structural segmentation constrains
ℓbelow the instability boundary without incurring exponen-
tial search cost.

spective provides a structural reinterpretation of recent ad-
vances in structured reasoning methods, including chain-of-
thought prompting [1], tree-based reasoning [2], and graph-
based reasoning frameworks [3], positioning them as im-
plicit responses to stability limitations rather than purely
heuristic design choices.
Empirically, our three-track evaluation validates these
predictions across multiple levels of abstraction. Track B
demonstrates the reconfiguration of exponential bottlenecks
through structural segmentation; the mechanistic chain-
sensitivity study isolates process-level collapse independent
of search complexity; and Track A reveals that structural
governance significantly enhances exploration fidelity in
real interactive environments [12], even when underlying
language-model outputs are strictly controlled.
Taken together, these findings suggest a necessary con-
ceptual shift in the development of intelligent systems: from
monolithic linear scaling toward structural governance.
While scaling laws successfully characterize aggregate per-
formance trends [10], they remain largely silent on the dy-
namical stability properties of extended reasoning trajecto-
ries. Our results indicate that sustaining long-horizon rea-
soning may depend less on increasing model capacity alone
and more on organizing inference through bounded seg-
ments (ℓi < L∗) interconnected by stabilization mecha-
nisms.
Several promising directions remain for future investiga-
tion:

References
[1] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou.
Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models.
In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35, pages
24824–24837, 2022.
[2] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas G McManus, Ivan Beck, Yuan Cao, Katie
Karten, Hyung Won Wang, Wenying Fu, et al. Tree
of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large
language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10601,
2023.
[3] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Ger-
stenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz
Lehmann, Michal Podstawski, Hubert Rodak, Piotr
Mutlu, et al.
Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate
problems with large language models. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
ume 38, pages 17682–17690, 2024.
[4] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Option Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du,
Izhak Shafran, and Karthik Narasimhan. React: Syner-
gizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2023.
[5] Noah Shinn, Federico Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
[6] Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmil-
lan, 2011.

1. Autonomous Node Optimization. Developing adaptive
mechanisms for node placement, potentially guided by
entropy-based diagnostics such as γt or ∆Ht, to enable
endogenous stabilization without external supervision.
2. Framework Generalization. Extending the stability

[8] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh.
Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for tem-
poral abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial
Intelligence, 112:181–211, 1999.

A.2
Problem Setup: The TextWorld Hard Sparse
Family (TW-HSFε)

[9] Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and
Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degenera-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.

We define a worst-case family of sparse long-horizon
POMDPs that isolates aliasing, sparsity, and procedural de-
pendency.

[10] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Danny Hernan-
dez, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Jeff Wu, and Dario Amodei.
Scaling
laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.

Definition 2 (TextWorld Hard Sparse Family, TW-HSFε).
Let M(L, A, ε) be a family of POMDPs parameterized by
horizon L ∈N, a finite action space A with |A| ≥2, and an
aliasing factor ε ∈[0, 1). Each instance M ∈M has:

[11] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2017.

• Hidden Unique Optimal Path: A unique action sequence
a∗
1:L ∈AL that deterministically transitions through la-
tent optimal states s∗
1 →· · · →s∗
L. Any deviation from
a∗
t transitions to an absorbing failure state sfail.
• Sparse Terminal Reward: r(st, at) = 1 iff t = L and
a1:L = a∗
1:L; otherwise r = 0.
• ε-Aliased Observations: There exists a fixed distribu-
tion D over observation space Ωsuch that for all non-
terminal optimal states s∗
t with t < L,

[12] Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, Akos K´ad´ar, Xingdi Yuan,
Ben
Kybartas,
Samuel
DesGroseilliers,
Faustine
Barekatain,
M-A
Rheault,
Frederic
Fieldhouse,
Zhengyun Ibrahim, Layla McManus, et al. Textworld:
A learning environment for text-based games.
In
Computer Games: 7th Workshop, CGW 2018, Held
in Conjunction with the 27th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages
161–176. Springer, 2018.

TV

Ω(· | s∗
t ), D

≤ε.

• Absence of Structural Signals: Observations encode no
explicit time index, progress marker, admissible action
constraints, or subgoal completion signals.

[13] Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William
Bialek. The information bottleneck method. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing, pages 368–
377, 2000.

The optimal path a∗
1:L is sampled uniformly from AL.

A.3
Indistinguishability of Histories

Aliasing prevents reliable depth inference from observation
histories. Let ht = (o1:t, a1:t−1) denote the history at time
t.

[14] Franc¸ois Chollet.
On the measure of intelligence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.

[15] Yury Polyanskiy and Yihong Wu.
Information The-
ory: From Coding to Learning. Cambridge University
Press, 2022.

Lemma 1 (History Indistinguishability). Fix any policy π.
Condition on survival (i.e., no transition to sfail) up to the
corresponding time. For any t, t′ < L:

[16] Lucien Le Cam. Asymptotic Methods in Statistical De-
cision Theory. Springer, 1986.

TV

Pπ(ht | survive(t)), Pπ(ht′ | survive(t′))

≤ε·min(t, t′).

Proof. Conditioned on survival, action prefixes are consis-
tent with the optimal path. Differences between histories
arise solely from observations. For the first k = min(t, t′)
steps, each observation distribution is within ε total variation
distance of the stationary distribution D. By tensorization
and triangle inequality:

A
Appendix A: Learning-Theoretic Lower
Bounds in Sparse Long-Horizon Text
Environments (A Problem-Complexity
Baseline)

A.1
Appendix Overview

k
X

This appendix analyzes a class of sparse long-horizon text
environments that induce exponential learning difficulty due
to partial observability, aliasing, and reward sparsity. The re-
sults here establish problem-complexity lower bounds of the
classical reinforcement learning and POMDP type.

TV

(o1, . . . , ok), (o′
1, . . . , o′
k)

≤

i=1
TV(Ω(· | s∗
i ), D) ≤kε.

Conditioning preserves total variation bounds by data pro-
cessing.

TV

Pπ(ht | survive), Pπ(ht′ | survive)

= O(c) = o(1).

2. Process instability (as characterized by Theorem A in
the main text).

In particular, no agent can reliably infer its depth t from its
history under survival.

B
Appendix B: Proof Outline for Theorem A
and Testable Contraction Assumptions

A.4
Single-Episode Success Probability
Lemma 2 (Near-Random Action Selection). For any policy
π and any t < L:

This appendix provides a proof outline for Theorem A and
clarifies the minimal assumption needed to obtain exponen-
tial decay of decision advantage under single-path autore-
gressive execution. Our main message is that exponential
decay follows from a process-level contraction property of
the induced decoding kernel. We do not claim a universal
closed-form derivation of the contraction constant from ar-
chitectural primitives (e.g., softmax) in this version; instead,
we state sufficient and testable conditions under which such
contraction holds.

Pπ(at = a∗
t | ht, survive(t)) ≤
1
|A| + O(tε).

Lemma 3 (Single-Episode Success Probability). For any
policy π, if ε ≤c/L:

Pπ(success) ≤C · |A|−L,

for constants c, C > 0.

A.5
Exponential Episode Complexity
Theorem 2 (Exponential Episode Complexity). To achieve
success probability at least δ ∈(0, 1) on TW-HSFε using N
independent episodes:

B.1
Restatement of Theorem A (Execution
Stability Horizon)

Consider an autoregressive reasoning trajectory as a Markov
process
Zt+1 ∼K(· | Zt),

N ≥Ω

|A|L log 1


,

δ

for ε ≤c/L.

where Zt is the latent execution state at step t and K is the
induced transition kernel of decoding and internal updates.
Let G ∈{0, 1} denote the target conclusion (correct vs. in-
correct). We define the decision advantage at step t as the
Bayes-optimal testing advantage:

A.6
Structural Augmentation via Landmarks
We formalize the effect of learning-time structure by parti-
tioning the horizon into subtasks separated by identifiable
landmarks.
Corollary 2 (Reduction via Landmarks). Assume there ex-
ist k ≥2 identifiable landmarks partitioning the task into
subtasks of lengths ℓ1, . . . , ℓk, with P

ρt := 1 −2Pe(t),
Pe(t) := inf
ϕ Pr[ϕ(Zt) ̸= G],

i ℓi = L. Let ℓmax =
maxi ℓi. If an agent can detect landmarks and learn each
subtask independently, then:

where the infimum is over all measurable predictors ϕ.
Hence ρt ∈[0, 1] and ρt = 0 corresponds to chance-level
inference.
Theorem A (informal). If the induced kernel loses a fixed
fraction of goal-relevant information per step (formalized
below), then ρt decays exponentially with t, implying a fi-
nite stability horizon L∗beyond which reliable single-path
execution becomes unstable.

Nstructured ≥Ω

k · |A|ℓmax log 1


.

δ

In the near-uniform case (ℓi ≈L/k):

Nstructured ≥Ω

k · |A|L/k
.

B.2
Objects and Notation

A.7
Interpretation and Relation to the Main Text
The results in this appendix demonstrate that end-to-end
learning without structure is exponentially intractable in
sparse long-horizon text environments, even when inference
execution is assumed ideal.
These bounds, however, address learning complexity
across episodes and do not explain failures that arise within
a single execution trajectory. In contrast, Theorem A in the
main text characterizes a distinct limitation: the instability
of autoregressive inference execution itself, which persists
even in settings where branching and search complexity van-
ish.
Together, these results indicate that long-horizon reason-
ing may fail for two orthogonal reasons:

Let

Pt := L(Zt | G = 1),
Qt := L(Zt | G = 0),

denote the conditional state distributions. We use total vari-
ation (TV) distance

∆t := TV(Pt, Qt)

as a distinguishability measure, and mutual information
I(G; Zt) as a goal-relevant information measure.
We assume balanced priors Pr(G = 1) = Pr(G = 0) =
1/2 for simplicity; this can be relaxed with minor constant
changes.

ρt ≤ρ0e−γt.

Solving ρt ≤τ yields the critical horizon

L∗= 1

γ ln ρ0

τ .

Assumption 1 (Kernel contraction (TV form)). There exists
η ∈(0, 1) such that for any pair of input distributions µ, ν
over Zt,
TV(µK, νK) ≤η TV(µ, ν),

B.5
Equivalent Formulation via SDPI (Mutual
Information Form)
Some readers may prefer an information-theoretic statement
that cleanly separates (i) per-step information loss from (ii)
hypothesis-testing conversion.
Assumption 2 (Per-step SDPI (MI form)). There exists α ∈
(0, 1) such that

where µK denotes the pushforward distribution after one
step of the Markov kernel K.

Interpretation. Assumption 1 isolates intrinsic process-
level instability as a property of the induced decoding chan-
nel itself, independent of branching, search complexity, or
task semantics. It says that one step of autoregressive ex-
ecution makes two hypotheses about the goal strictly less
distinguishable.

I(G; Zt+1) ≤α I(G; Zt)
for all joint laws of (G, Zt)
(19)

Testability.
The constant η is an effective contraction co-
efficient that can be estimated empirically by fitting distin-
guishability decay across controlled tasks (see Section B.6).

consistent with the process.
Assumption 2 is a strong data processing inequality (SDPI)
for the induced channel Zt 7→Zt+1, commonly satisfied by
mixing/noisy channels under suitable regularity [15].
Lemma 6 (SDPI implies exponential decay of MI). Under
Assumption 2, I(G; Zt) ≤αtI(G; Z0).

Sufficient conditions (informal).
Assumption 1 holds for
many ergodic/noisy Markov kernels with a Doeblin/mi-
norization condition or a Dobrushin contraction coefficient
strictly less than 1. This includes kernels that (i) apply a de-
terministic map followed by (ii) an irreducible noise channel
that is independent of G and has a uniform mixing com-
ponent. Standard references on contraction coefficients and
strong data processing inequalities apply (e.g., lecture notes
and surveys such as [15]).

Proof. Iterate Assumption 2.

Lemma 7 (MI controls testing advantage (up to constants)).
There exists a universal constant c > 0 such that

ρt ≤c
p

I(G; Zt).

Proof sketch. This follows from standard binary hypothesis-
testing inequalities (e.g., Le Cam/Bretagnolle–Huber type
bounds). See [16] for classical references. Constants are not
central to our claims.

B.4
From Contraction to Exponential Decay
Lemma 4 (Iterated contraction implies exponential decay in
TV). Under Assumption 1, we have

∆t ≤ηt∆0.

Combining Lemma 6 and Lemma 7 yields

I(G; Z0) αt/2 = ρ0e−γt,
γ := −1

Proof. By definition, Pt+1 = PtK and Qt+1 = QtK. Ap-
plying Assumption 1 with µ = Pt and ν = Qt yields

ρt ≤c
p

2 ln α > 0.

B.6
Operational Definition: Estimating α(C) or
η(C) from Controlled Tasks
To make the contraction assumption reviewer-auditable, we
propose an operational estimate.
Fix a controlled task family indexed by a complexity pa-
rameter C (e.g., synthetic legal reasoning instances with
controlled distractor load, depth, or aliasing). For each t,
measure the Bayes error (or a calibrated proxy) of predicting
G from Zt, yielding Pe(t; C) and advantage

∆t+1 = TV(PtK, QtK) ≤η TV(Pt, Qt) = η ∆t.

Iterating gives ∆t ≤ηt∆0.

Lemma 5 (Decision advantage is controlled by distinguisha-
bility). With balanced priors, the Bayes-optimal testing ad-
vantage satisfies
ρt ≤∆t.

Proof. For testing G ∈{0, 1} from Zt under equal priors,
the Bayes error satisfies

ρt(C) = 1 −2Pe(t; C).

Pe(t) = 1

Fit an exponential curve over the range where decay is ap-
proximately geometric:

2

1 −TV(Pt, Qt)

,

and hence ρt = 1 −2Pe(t) = TV(Pt, Qt) = ∆t. (If one
uses an alternative definition of ρt (e.g., via a fixed decision
rule), the inequality form ρt ≤∆t still holds.)

ρt(C) ≈ρ0(C) e−γ(C)t.

Then define the effective coefficients

η(C) := e−γ(C),
α(C) := e−2γ(C).

Proof sketch of Theorem A. Combine
Lemma
4
and
Lemma 5:
ρt ≤∆t ≤ηt∆0.

This turns the abstract stability assumption into an empiri-
cally estimable quantity.

Zt+1 = aZt + ϵt,
ϵt ∼N(0, σ2),

with |a| < 1. Two initial hypotheses about Z0 become less
distinguishable over time, producing geometric decay in any
reasonable distinguishability proxy.

import numpy as np
np.random.seed(42)
T = 100
eta_est = 0.95
delta = [0.5]
for t in range(1, T):
delta.append(eta_est * delta[-1])
# delta[t] decays geometrically; gamma = -ln(eta_est)

This toy example is included solely to visualize geometric
decay; it is not intended as a faithful mechanistic model of
Transformer internals.

B.8
Remarks on Scope
Remark 1 (What this appendix does and does not claim).
Theorem A is a structural result: once the induced decoding
dynamics admit a strict per-step contraction (TV) or SDPI
(MI), exponential decay of decision advantage follows. De-
riving an exact contraction constant from specific architec-
tural primitives (e.g., attention softmax) is a separate, more
model-specific question and is left for future work.