Muhammad Awais Jadoon, Sebastian Robitzsch
InterDigital Europe Ltd, London, United Kingdom,
Email: {Muhammad.AwaisJadoon,

We motivate the need for a Sensing Data Storage Function
(SDSF) to retain historical sensing data that can be reused
to reduce redundant live re-sensing, bandwidth, and energy
consumption, while preserving requested sensing service Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs). Historical sensing data refers
to the sensing data that is collected previously using sensing
operations from both 3GPP and non-3GPP sources.
An example use case to illustrate where such functionality
can significantly improve the offered sensing service is pro-
vided in Fig. 1. The figure depicts a vehicular use case where
a traffic junction is sensed and the 6G system is requested to
provide sensing results to a third-party SSC informing about
any moving environmental object and its object type (e.g.
pedestrian, vehicle, lorry, cyclist, motorcyclist).

Abstract—Current architecture proposals within standards de-
velopment organizations such as ETSI and 3GPP enable sensing
capabilities in mobile networks; however, they do not include
a repository for storing sensing data. Such a repository can be
used for AI model training and to complement ongoing sensing
service provisioning by improving efficiency and accuracy. One
way of realizing this is through the fusion of historical sensing data
with live sensing data. In this paper, we study historical and live
sensing data fusion for Integrated Sensing and Communication in
future 6G systems and introduce a Sensing Data Storage Function
to store historical sensing data and sensing results. We show
how the Sensing Data Storage Function can be used with other
network functions in a 6G architecture proposition for Integrated
Sensing and Communication. We validate our proposal with
a measurement model and show performance improvements in
terms of detection probability and false-alarm rate. The network
functionality to fuse and process sensing data combines live sens-
ing measurements with previously sensed historical sensing data
using a map-aware hard filter that rejects detections consistent
with known static structures. Our simulation illustrates that, for
a traffic junction scenario, map-aware hard filtering substantially
reduces false alarms without degrading detection probability.
Index Terms—6G, ISAC, sensing fusion, map-aware filtering,
detection probability, false-alarm rate, 3GPP, ETSI.

arXiv:2603.22488v1 [cs.NI] 23 Mar 2026

I. INTRODUCTION

Integrated Sensing and Communication (ISAC) aims to
endow mobile networks with environmental perception in ad-
dition to legacy communications. Recent and ongoing 3GPP
efforts [1] and European Telecommunications Standards In-
stitute (ETSI) Industry Specification Group (ISG) ISAC [2]
work define requirements and use cases for ISAC as well
as architectural enhancements required to enable ISAC in 6G
systems. Across all proposed solutions for 5G-A in 3GPP [3]
and 6G in ETSI [4], a new Sensing Function (SF) is proposed
in the 6G Core Network (CN) to coordinate sensing tasks
and process sensing data. In many ETSI proposed solutions,
the SF is further divided into a Sensing Coordination Func-
tion (SCF) and a Sensing Processing Function (SPF). SCF
coordinates sensing tasks or sensing operations while the SPF
processes sensing measurements/data and generates sensing
results. Sensing results are then provided to the Sensing Service
Consumer (SSC). However, there is no standardized function
responsible for persistent storage of sensing data and results.

Fig. 1. System Model

In this paper, we propose an SDSF as a new 6G CN NF to
store sensing data/results and report or expose them to Network
Functions (NFs) or third-party Application Functions (AFs),
respectively. We use a map-aware hard filter at SPF that uses
historical sensing data maps to reject static-consistent returns.
We provide a measurement model to validate our proposal.
We show that the historical sensing data (map) can reduce
clutter, and a successful fusion reduces false-alarm rate, while
probability is not affected significantly as compared to when
only live sensing data is used.

This work has been partially funded by the European Commission Horizon
Europe SNS JU projects MultiX (GA 101192521).

II. RELATED WORK

ETSI’s ISG ISAC published 6G use cases on ISAC [2]
ETSI ISG ISAC GR001 [2] also reports detailed deployment
considerations. Meanwhile, 3GPP started studying 6G use cases
[3] themselves, structured around all six usage scenarios in
ITU-R’s IMT 2030 vision framework with one being ISAC.
3GPP is currently moving to Stage 2 work in 5G-A to enable
mono-static gNB-only sensing [3], [5]. These developments led
to the discussion of a sensing-enabled 5G architecture, which
already provides the flexibility to support new functionalities
and services such as ISAC and the enablement of unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) use cases in 5G. The diverse 6G ISAC
use cases studied in ETSI and 3rd Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP), together with their functional and performance
requirements, necessitates the evolution of existing 5G system
capabilities and, most likely, the introduction of new 6G CN
NFs. Accordingly, several research efforts and standardization
activities are underway to determine how 5G System (5GS)
should evolve and how the 6G architecture may incorporate
additional functionalities to support emerging ISAC use cases.
[6]–[10].
In [11], [12], architecture for ISAC is proposed, where a
dedicated SCF is used to coordinate sensing activities. The
functionality of an SCF contains configuration parameters for
the sensing request. The sensing request contains information
regarding the type of the target and also the KPI requirements.
A new architecture has been proposed recently in [6] where a
dedicated SCF serves as an anchor to all sensing task-related
functions and where its services can be used by other NFs.
Similarly, in [13], [14], a comparable architecture is proposed,
comprising two entities: one responsible for coordination, i.e.,
SCF and configuration related to the sensing task, and the
other dedicated to processing the sensing data, i.e., SPF. In
[15], we had proposed an efficient way of collecting sensing
data. However, only [10] calls out a new 6G CN NF providing
storage capabilities, but without any detailed procedures on
how to leverage an SDSF and the reuse of sensing data to
efficiently utilize sensing data to avoid redundant sensing and
saving energy and resources.

Fig. 2. Proposed Sensing Workflow for 6GS with SDSF as storage function

standardized format (e.g., point clouds, spatio-temporal maps)
indexed by a Sensing Task ID (STID), time and context.
SDSF supports query/subscribe interfaces for other NFs in the
architecture such as the SPF.
The SCF orchestrates sensing tasks and configures Sens-
ing Entities (SEs) (e.g., User Equipment (UE) and/or Next-
Generation NodeB (gNB)) based on the input received from
the SPF. The SPF maps sensing service KPI requirements to
sensing measurements that are required to achieve the afore-
mentioned KPIs. These sensing measurement determinations
are provided to the SCF to configure SEs.
The SPF collects sensing data, either from gNB as sensing
data generation entity or from SEs, and is capable of retrieving
historical sensing data from the SDSF. In such scenario, the
SPF performs the fusion of live and historical sensing data and
outputs sensing results. The fusion task can be performed using
advanced signal processing algorithms or AIML models. How
these algorithms operate is outside of the scope of this paper.
For validity of the proposed storage function, we provide a
measurement model that uses map-aware filtering, detailed in
Section IV.
For simplicity, we assume that SCF and SPF are part of the
SF.
In the context of the vehicular use case, the SDSF enables
the reuse of static context (i.e., offline sensing data) and reduces
measurement load/bandwidth in the SPF without re-sensing the
entire scene. The SCF can decide when offline data suffices and
when to refresh the map if sensing service KPIs drift.

B. Proposed Solution for Historical Sensing Data Utilization
for a Sensing Task in 6GS

Stepwise procedure:
1) SEs register their sensing capabilities with the SF.
2) The Sensing Service Consumer (SSC) sends a sensing
service request to the SF. The request includes KPI
requirements for the sensing service, the consent status
for using historical sensing data, and optionally the
allowed age/freshness of historical data. An SSC may be

III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURAL ENHANCEMENTS IN 6G
ISAC

A. Proposed Functions in 6GS

A new logical NF, called SDSF, is proposed as shown in
Fig 2, that stores sensing data and/or sensing results in a

Fig. 3. Call flow for the proposed SDSF

a Radio Access Network (RAN) node requiring sensing
analytics (e.g., beamforming recommendations, energy
optimization guidance), an application on a UE, another
NF, or a third-party AF.
3) The SF determines whether the KPI requirements can
be satisfied, sends an acknowledgment to the SSC, and
appends the STID associated with the request.
4) In parallel, the SF sends a sensing data usage policy
request to the Policy Control Function (PCF). The request
may include: consent tokens for SEs, the purpose of
sensing data usage (e.g., RAN analytics, sensing results
generation), the location/area of the sensing task, and any
charging policy information.
5) The PCF processes the request and returns policies asso-
ciated with the STID. The PCF may permit, deny, or per-
mit with obligations. It may provide consent revocation
rules, charging rules, and lists of prohibited areas. These
policies assist the SF in determining whether historical
sensing data can be used when generating sensing results
or analytics for the RAN.
6) After receiving the policies from the PCF, the SF queries
the SDSF for an indication of whether the required
sensing data (raw, processed, or high-level) exists in the
SDSF’s storage. The SF uses the sensing task context
(e.g., target type, weather conditions, location, time)
and the STID, enabling the SF and SDSF to exchange
historical sensing data specific to the task.
7) The SDSF responds with an indication of whether the

IV. MEASUREMENT MODEL
In this Section, we formalize how a local polar measurement
(r, β), produced by a SE, is expressed in the world (Cartesian)
frame and how its uncertainty is propagated for use in filtering
and association. Consider a 2-D planar junction (horizontal
plane). An SE s, e.g., a UE or BS with location and orientation

min
j


ˆxj −xi


≤gdet,
(7)


+ n,
n ∼N

0, Σrb

,
Σrb = diag(σ2
r, σ2
β),

z =
r
β

where gdet is an Euclidean gate (in meters). We use Euclidean
distance for simplicity. An alternative is Mahalanobis-distance
gating with Σxy, which is used in classical tracking [18], [19].

(1)

where r ∈R>0 is range (meters), i.e., distance from the
SE to the detected target; β ∈(−π, π] is bearing (radians),
i.e., the azimuth angle in the SE’s local frame relative to the
SE boresight (forward axis). In world (global) azimuth, the
direction is β +θs [16], [17]. n is the zero-mean measurement
noise, independent across r and β with variances σ2
r and σ2
β
(m2, rad2).
These measurements are obtained in local coordinates of
the SE in order to fuse measurements from several SEs with
different orientations, SPF converts the detection to global
frame as,

B. Map-Aware Filtering

For map-aware hard filtering, we reject a detection if it lies
inside the dilated static map region:

ˆx ∈M ⊕B(g),
(8)

where M is the union of static structures (static map with
global coordinates), ⊕is the Minkowski sum, and B(g) is a
disk of radius g (meters). The hard mask rejects any detections
whose back-projected (x, y) lies within the dilated map. This
means that every true measurement, if it happens close to a
building edges, may be rejected.

x
y


=
xs
ys


+ R(θs)
r cos β
r sin β


,
(2)

V. PERFORMANCE METRICS

(3)

We focus on two sensing metrics: detection probability (Pd)
and false-alarm rate (FA). Both of these metrics directly
quantify how well a system separates true targets from clutter
at a given operating point (gate), and they are the standard
event-level quantities used in validation gating and association
[18], [19].
Pd (true-positive probability) measures target observability
and association success under a given gate, while FA (false
positives per step) measures the residual clutter that survives
filtering and gating.
Pd and FA are standard metrics to validate that historical
sensing data (e.g., maps) can be fused with live sensing to
suppress clutter while maintaining detection performance. They
align with classical gating/association theory [18], [19] and
admit a clean analytical expectation under Poisson thinning.
At time t, let {ˆxj(t)} be the set of accepted detections
in the global (world) frame after any pre-processing (e.g.,
map-aware hard mask), and let xi(t) be the true position of
target i. We use Euclidean validation gate with radius gdet
(meters) for metric computation (consistent across baselines).
Symbols: i ∈{1, . . . , N} indexes targets; j indexes detections;
t ∈{1, . . . , T} indexes time steps; ∥· ∥is the Euclidean norm.

where


.
(4)

R(θs) =
cos θs
−sin θs
sin θs
cos θs

The vector

r cos β, r sin β
T is the detection’s Cartesian
coordinates in the SE’s local frame. This is the standard
radar/robotics transform used for multi-sensor perception and
map alignment [16], [17].
The SPF needs Σxy to perform validation gating, i.e., decide
if a detection is consistent with a static map. The transform
in (2) is nonlinear in (r, β) and to express the positional
uncertainty of a target detection, we use a first-order Extended
Kalman-filter linearization around the current measurement
mean [17] as:

∂(r, β) =
cos β
−r sin β
sin β
r cos β


,
(5)

J = ∂(x, y)

and therefore,

Σxy = J Σrb J⊤,
(6)

where J is the Jacobian of the (r, β) →(x, y) mapping and
it quantifies how small changes in r or β perturb (x, y). Σxy
is Cartesian covariance (m2). This means that at long range r,
the lateral standard deviation is approximately r σβ, while the
radial deviation is σr.

A. Detection Probability

A detection for target i occurs at time t if at least one
accepted detection falls within the gate:

A. Detection Gating

Di(t) ≜

min
j


ˆxj(t) −xi(t)


≤gdet

,
(9)

Gating is performed at the SPF and it is the process of
deciding whether a detection matches a target. Once each
detection has its Cartesian covariance, we can now check
whether it is statistically consistent with a predicted target or

where Di(t) is the detection event (true/false), ˆxj(t) is the
j-th accepted detection in world coordinates, xi(t) is the true
target position and gdet is the gate radius (m).

1.0

g_det=1
g_det=2

g_det=3
g_det=4

g_det=5
g_det=10

1: for each time step t do

2:
Collect raw detections from sensing entities (live data).
3:
if historical + live fusion is enabled then
4:
Apply map-aware hard mask using M to remove
detections in M ⊕B(g).
5:
end if

0.8

Detection probability Pd

0.6

6:
Back-project accepted detections to world coordinates.
7:
For each in-bounds target i, perform the detection test
(Eq. (9)) and update Pd,i (Eq. (10)).
8:
Count unmatched detections as false-alarms (Eq. (12))
and accumulate FA (Eq. (13)).
9: end for
10: Compute final metrics Pd and FA over all time steps.

0.4

0.2

0
1
2
3
4
5
Mask margin g (m)

11: return Pd, FA

Fig. 4. Probability of Detection Pd g for different values of g and gdet

g_det=1
g_det=2

g_det=3
g_det=4

g_det=5
g_det=10

70

Let Ti
= {t :
xi(t) is inside the sensing area} with
Ti = |Ti|. The per-target and average detection probabilities
respectively are

60

Average false alarms per step

50

Pd,i = 1

X

t∈Ti
1[Di(t)] ,
(10)

40

Ti

30

N
X

20

Pd = 1

i=1
Pd,i.
(11)

N

10

0
1
2
3
4
5
Mask margin g (m)

where 1[·] is the indicator function, N is the number of targets
and Pd is the averaged detection probability across targets.
Pd increases if (i) the target has higher per-step detection
success or (ii) association is easier (less clutter within the gate).
Map-aware filtering primarily aids (ii) by removing static-
consistent returns near structures, thereby reducing mismatches.

Fig. 5. Average False-Alarm Rate for different values of g and gdet

to collect range-bearing measurements with additive Gaussian
noise (σr = 0.8 m, σβ = 2◦). Each SE detects a target
with fixed probability Pdet = 0.95. We generate N = 8
moving targets (mixed horizontal/vertical paths) per frame,
while clutter is generated as a Poisson process with mean
λF A = 60 detections/step (across SEs), with 70% concentrated
near building edges (Gaussian jitter), 30% uniform background.
For each mask margin g ∈[0, 5]m and validation gate gdet ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10}, detections are first filtered by map-aware hard
mask and then associated with true targets using the Euclidean
gate gdet as shown in Algorithm 1.

B. False-alarm rate

A detection is a false-alarm at time t if it does not match
any target within the gate:

FAt = #
n
j : min
i


ˆxj(t) −xi(t)


> gdet
o
.
(12)

FAt is the number of unmatched detections at step t and
#{·} counts elements.
The average false-alarms per step is

T
X

FA = 1

t=1
FAt,
(13)

T

B. Results Discussion

where T is the total number of steps. FA measures residual
clutter that survived filtering and the gate.

We present simulation results for Pd and FA, averaged over
50 Monte Carlo realizations and shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5,
respectively. In Fig. 4, when g = 0, it means all detections
are considered and hence the Pd is highest for this case.
As g is increased, we observe a dip in Pd. This is because
the hard mask rejects any detections whose back-projected
(x, y) lies within the dilated map. This means that every true
measurement, if it happens close to a building edges, may

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Setup

We simulate an experiment with a 120 m × 120 m junction
with two rectangular buildings acting as a static map structure
M. Two SEs are placed at (0, 0) and (120, 0) with θs = 0

VII. CONCLUSION

We motivated historical and live sensing data fusion for
ISAC and introduced the SDSF in a 6G architecture proposition
to store sensing data/results. We validated our proposal using a
map-aware hard filter at the SPF (part of the SF). A controlled
evaluation shows large false-alarm reductions with no loss in
detection probability. The formulation is grounded in standard
range–azimuth models, validation gating, and Poisson thinning.
Future work includes uncertainty-aware margins. We used a
fixed margin g for hard masking. A covariance-aware margin
g(r, β) = k
p

λmax(Σxy) can be used along with 3-D geom-
etry and more realistic maps of the environment. One future
direction can be to analyze how much energy and resources
are saved using historical sensing data.

REFERENCES

[1] “TR 22.870: Study on 6G use cases and service requirements, release
20,” 3GPP. [Online]. Available:
22_series/22.870/22870-101.zip
[2] ETSI ISG ISAC, “GR ISC 001 v1.1.1 (2025-03): Integrated sensing
and communications (ISAC); use cases and deployment scenarios,”
2025. [Online]. Available:
099/001/01.01.01_60/gr_ISC001v010101p.pdf
[3] 3GPP, “TR 22.837: Feasibility study on integrated sensing and commu-
nication, rel-19,” 2024.
[4] “GR
ISC
003:
Integrated
sensing
and
communications
(ISAC);
use
cases
and
deployment
scenarios,”
2025.
[Online].
Available:

[5] 3GPP, “TS 22.137: Service requirements for integrated sensing and
communication (stage 1), Rel-19,” 2024.
[6] P. Gersing, M. Doll, J. Huschke, and O. Holschke, “Architecture
proposal for 6G systems integrating sensing and communication,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: