DEFault++: Automated Fault Detection, Categorization,
and Diagnosis for Transformer Architectures

Sigma Jahan

Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada

Saurabh Singh Rajput

Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada

arXiv:2604.28118v1 [cs.SE] 30 Apr 2026

Tushar Sharma

Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada

Mohammad Masudur Rahman

Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, Canada

Abstract

1
Introduction

Transformer models are widely used across natural language processing (OpenAI, 2023; Gemini
Team et al., 2023), code generation (Chen et al., 2021), software engineering (Qiu et al., 2025), and
medical imaging (Esteva et al., 2017). Their effectiveness stems largely from the attention mech-
anism (Vaswani et al., 2017), which addresses limitations of sequential models such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) (Vaswani et al., 2017). Attention is implemented through model code,
optimized kernels, mixed-precision arithmetic, and task-specific preprocessing.

Small implementation mistakes in attention logic, masking, or kernel integration can silently alter
model behavior without raising explicit errors (Jahan et al., 2025a; de Santana Correia & Colombini,
2022; Zhai et al., 2023a; Wei et al., 2025; Miller, 2023; Voita et al., 2019). For example, attention
heads can degenerate or become redundant (Michel et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019). These faults
can reduce representation diversity and affect model performance without producing immediate
errors. Even when a symptom becomes visible, such as poor output quality or unstable fine-tuning,
it rarely identifies the responsible component. The same symptom can arise from projection errors,
masking faults, positional encoding faults, or residual corruption (Jahan et al., 2026). Developers
can inspect loss curves, gradients, attention maps, and parameter updates, but these measurements
alone do not connect a visible symptom to the root cause or the responsible transformer component.

Recent work has proposed automated debugging techniques for DNN programs. Rule-based tech-
niques, such as AutoTrainer (Zhang et al., 2021), UMLAUT (Yuan et al., 2021), and DeepDiagno-
sis (Wardat et al., 2022), check training runs against fixed symptoms such as exploding gradients,
vanishing gradients, or oscillating loss. Learned classifiers, such as DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022) and
DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b), train on runtime features to predict fault categories such as loss
function, learning rate, or activation. Both lines of work are architecture-agnostic and remain useful
for general training and model faults in transformer programs. However, they do not address the
class of faults that arise from transformer-specific mechanisms (Jahan et al., 2025a; 2026). These
techniques observe runtime behavior at the model level rather than inside individual transformer
components. As a result, they cannot reliably distinguish transformer-specific faults from generic
training problems, nor can they identify which component is responsible.
Transformer-specific
debuggers such as ATTNChecker (Liang et al., 2025) and AtPatch (Weng et al., 2026) target nar-
rower failure modes, such as NaN or Inf values during attention or attention-map anomalies at
the patch level. They do not cover the full taxonomy of transformer faults shown in Figure 3.
Consequently, existing techniques report broad categories such as incorrect activation or incorrect
loss, without identifying which transformer component caused the fault, such as QKV or mask-
ing, or which mechanism inside that component explains it, such as dimension mismatch or stale
projection update.

four existing DNN debugging techniques on Level 1 fault detection across AUROC, macro-F1, and
accuracy. In our developer study (N = 21), repair-action accuracy improved from 57.1% without
assistance to 83.3% with DEFault++ assistance.

In summary, we make the following contributions:

(a) DEFault++, a hierarchical technique that detects faults in transformer programs, classifies
them into fault categories, and identifies the root cause within that category.

(b) DEForm, a mutation technique for transformer models based on a taxonomy of real-world
transformer faults.

(c) DEFault-bench, a transformer fault detection benchmark of 3,739 labeled instances pro-
duced by DEForm.

(d) A Fault Propagation Graph (FPG) that encodes how faults propagate through transformer
components and provides the diagnostic model with the transformer’s architectural struc-
ture.

(e) A training objective for root-cause diagnosis that combines supervised contrastive learning
with prototype matching to separate root causes within the same fault category, and an
FPG-based explanation that reports which feature groups support each diagnosis.

(f) An evaluation of DEFault++ on 3,739 labeled instances covering both encoder and decoder
architectures, on real-world transformer faults reproduced from public GitHub issues, and
through a developer study with 21 participants.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a motivating example. Sec-
tion 3 describes the construction of DEFault-bench and the DEForm mutation technique. Section 4
describes the DEFault++ diagnostic technique. Sections 5 to 7 report the controlled benchmark
evaluation, the real-world fault evaluation, and the developer study, respectively. Sections 8 and 9
discuss limitations, future directions, and threats to validity. Section 10 surveys related work, and
Section 11 concludes the paper.

2
Motivating Example

To show the class of faults DEFault++ targets, consider the real-world fault in Listing 2.1, taken
from the HuggingFace Diffusers library (Issue #119031).
The method fuse_qkv_projections
merges three projection layers (query q_proj, key k_proj, and value v_proj) into one fused layer
(to_qkv) and redirects the model to route all computation through this fused layer. The original
projection layers are retained because deleting them would cause LoRA to raise an error when it
cannot find its adapter targets. However, retaining them lets LoRA attach to modules that are no
longer part of the forward pass. In the example, LoRA targets q_proj and v_proj, even though
the forward pass uses only the fused layer to_qkv. The adapters therefore have no effect on model
output. The fault produces no visible error. The model runs without exception, the loss decreases,
and no invalid values (e.g., NaN or Inf) appear. The only observable indication that something is
wrong is that fine-tuning does not change model behavior.

1
class CrossAttention(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, dim, heads=8):
3
super().__init__()
4
self.q_proj = nn.Linear(dim, dim)
5
self.k_proj = nn.Linear(dim, dim)
6
self.v_proj = nn.Linear(dim, dim)
7
self.out_proj = nn.Linear(dim, dim)
8
9
def fuse_qkv_projections(self):
10
"""Fuse Q/K/V into a single linear layer for efficiency."""
11
w = torch.cat([self.q_proj.weight,
12
self.k_proj.weight,
13
self.v_proj.weight])
14
self.to_qkv = nn.Linear(dim, 3 * dim)
15
self.to_qkv.weight.data.copy_(w)
16
# BUG: original q_proj, k_proj, v_proj NOT deleted
17
18
def forward(self, x, context=None):
19
q, k, v = self.to_qkv(x).chunk(3, dim=-1)
# uses fused layer
20
# ... attention computation with q, k, v ...
21
return self.out_proj(attn_output)
22
23
# --- Downstream: LoRA targets the stale projections ---
24
lora_config = LoraConfig(
25
target_modules=["q_proj", "v_proj"],
# inactive in forward pass
26
)
27
model = get_peft_model(pipeline.unet, lora_config)
28
model.train()
# LoRA adapts stale layers; no effect on forward pass

Listing 2.1: Faulty QKV projection fusion from HuggingFace Diffusers Issue #11903 (simplified)

Static analysis misses this fault because the original layers still exist, are correctly typed, and remain
reachable in the parameter list. Dynamic techniques miss it for one of two reasons. Rule-based tools
(e.g., AutoTrainer, UMLAUT, DeepLocalize) (Zhang et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Wardat et al.,
2021) look for symptoms such as oscillating loss, heuristic validation-trend violations, or NaN/Inf,
none of which occurs in this case. Learned classifiers (e.g., DeepFD, DEFault) (Cao et al., 2022;
Jahan et al., 2025b) use DNN-level fault categories that do not represent transformer components.
ATTNChecker (Liang et al., 2025) targets temporary NaN/Inf in attention, which this fault does
not produce.

In contrast, DEFault++ measures runtime traces such as QKV alignment, attention entropy, and
projection update activity during training. These features help characterize the faulty component
(i.e., the QKV projection path). DEFault++ therefore detects the fault at Level 1, assigns it to
the correct category (i.e., QKV) at Level 2, and identifies the root cause (i.e., a stale projection
update path) at Level 3.

3
Benchmark Construction

taken from documented fault root causes, two injection mechanisms (one for stored parameters,
one for forward computations), and a structural check that runs before the statistical test. We also
replace DeepCrime’s twenty-seed generalized linear model with a one-sided sign-flip permutation
test at five matched seeds, which keeps the test exact at α = 0.05 and reduces the compute cost
per mutant.

Each fault is specified by a configuration C = (m, t, u, f, v, ℓ, σ) that fixes the model m, the fine-
tuning task t, the target component u, the fault category f, the fault variant v, the target layer ℓ,
and the severity σ. We then run paired clean and faulty fine-tuning under matched random seeds,
validate each mutant statistically against its clean counterpart on the task metric, and retain the
validated mutants together with their training-time measurements as labeled instances for the
diagnostic model. Figure 1 shows the benchmark construction workflow.

We organize this section into the fault taxonomy and mutation operators (Section 3.1), the in-
jection mechanism (Section 3.2), the subject models and tasks (Section 3.3), mutant validation
(Section 3.4), and DEFault-bench statistics (Section 3.5).

Figure 1: Workflow for constructing DEFault-bench

3.1
Fault Taxonomy and Mutation Operators

Each mutation operator matches a transformer fault root cause that has been reported in real-world
projects. The attention-internal categories and root causes come from the attention fault taxonomy
of Jahan et al. (2026), which classifies 555 attention faults collected from open-source projects. The
non-attention categories (Embedding, FFN, LayerNorm, Residual, Output) come from prior DNN
fault taxonomies that catalog real DL faults: Humbatova et al. (2020) and Islam et al. (2019),
which report 970 faults across five DL libraries.

We focus on implementation errors that do not raise runtime errors, such as configuration mistakes
and silent numerical issues. These faults require statistical observation against a clean baseline
for detection. We exclude explicit faults because conventional tests or runtime checks often detect
them.

We decompose each transformer block into six units that match common implementation bound-
aries. For a standard transformer block (Vaswani et al., 2017):

h = LayerNorm
x + MHA(x)

(1)

y = LayerNorm
h + FFN(h)

(2)

where x ∈Rn×d is an input sequence, MHA is multi-head self-attention, and the position-wise
feed-forward network (FFN) follows. From this structure, we define six units: embeddings (input
representations), multi-head self-attention, FFN, layer normalization, residual connections, and
the output projection head. The same unit boundaries apply under pre-norm variants. Only the
ordering of LayerNorm changes. For each unit, we define one or more fault categories, and each
category contains multiple variants that represent specific bug patterns. Figure 2 shows the fault
categories grouped by transformer component.

(b) Attention Internals

(a) Transformer Unit

Output
Faults

Linear 𝑊𝑂

Output
Projection Head

Softmax
MatMul

LayerNorm

Masking
Faults

FFN
Faults

Mask

Feed-Forward
Network (FFN)

Kernel Faults
(affects whole block)

Score Comp.
Faults

Normalization
Faults

Scale

Residual
Faults

LayerNorm

Attention
Variant Faults

MatMul

Multi-Head
Self-Attention

QKV
Faults

Linear
𝑊𝐾
Linear
𝑊𝑄

Linear
𝑊𝑉

Embedding
Faults

Embeddings

KV-Cache
Faults

Input Sequence x

Input (from previous layer)

Positional
Encoding Faults

Figure 2: Fault categories organized by transformer component. Part (a) shows block-level categories;
Part (b) shows attention-internal categories

Multi-head self-attention is the most complex unit and a frequent source of faults in practice (Jahan
et al., 2025a; Michel et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019). We write self-attention as

QK⊤

!

Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax

V
(3)

where Q, K, V are linear projections of the input, dk is the key dimension, and M is an additive
mask. We treat each component of Equation (3) as a potential fault surface and group attention
faults into seven categories. Six apply to both encoders and decoders. The seventh, KV Cache, is
decoder-only.

Attention masking faults corrupt the mask M through missing padding masks, inverted mask logic,
or incorrect reshaping across batch and head dimensions.
For decoder-only self-attention, this
category also covers causal-mask violations that allow attention to flow from position i to future
positions j > i.
QKV projection faults corrupt the projection matrices W Q, W K, W V through
shared or swapped projections, zero-initialized projections, or frozen parameters. Score computa-
tion faults corrupt the scaling and dropout around attention scores through missing 1/√dk scaling,
misplaced dropout, or unsafe mixed-precision conversions. Positional encoding faults corrupt posi-
tional information through off-by-one errors, truncation beyond the supported sequence length, or
omission of positional embeddings. Kernel faults stem from misconfiguration of attention kernels,
including mismatched dropout probabilities and silent backend fallbacks. Attention variant faults
represent the selection of a wrong attention variant, such as single-head instead of multi-head at-
tention, or applying causal masking in a bidirectional encoder. KV Cache faults target key-value
cache management in autoregressive decoders through stale caches, off-by-one indexing, truncated
caches, or cross-request leaks (Adnan et al., 2024).

The remaining five units have a single fault category each. Input embedding faults corrupt token and
segment embeddings by zeroing subsets, swapping pairs, or scaling segment embeddings. FFN faults
alter hidden-layer characteristics by scaling weights, permanently dropping neurons, or replacing
the nonlinearity. Layer normalization faults modify LayerNorm parameters by scaling or zeroing the
learned scale parameter γ, shifting the bias parameter β, or misconfiguring the numerical stability
term ϵ (Xiong et al., 2020; Mosbach et al., 2021). Residual connection faults break skip connections
by removing them, scaling the residual path, or injecting noise. Output projection faults corrupt
prediction heads by scaling logits, zeroing rows for selected output classes, or reinitializing the
projection.

Figure 3 shows the complete fault taxonomy that defines the Level 2 and Level 3 label spaces.
The seven attention-specific categories and their 25 root causes are derived from the attention
fault taxonomy (Jahan et al., 2026). The five non-attention categories (Input/Embedding, Layer
Normalization, FFN, Residual, and Output) and their 20 root causes are derived from prior DNN
fault taxonomies (Humbatova et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2019) and the DeepCrime mutation op-
erators (Humbatova et al., 2021). Each root cause name identifies the fundamental mechanism
or parameter that is faulty (e.g., activation function, dropout rate, weight scaling) rather than a
specific corrective action. The taxonomy contains 12 fault categories. Eleven apply to encoders
and all 12 apply to decoders, since KV Cache is decoder-only. Together, the 12 categories define
40 root causes for encoders and 45 for decoders.

Tables 1 and 2 list the mutation operators implemented in DEForm (Section 3.2), separated into
attention-specific operators and architecture-level operators. Each operator is based on a trans-
former fault root cause associated with the units in Figure 2, following prior fault taxonomies (Jahan
et al., 2025a; Humbatova et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2019; Humbatova et al., 2021). The operator
name preserves the corresponding root-cause mechanism, following (Humbatova et al., 2021). How-
ever, the final benchmark includes only the configuration that can run successfully during training
and evaluation.

Figure 3: Taxonomy of transformer fault categories and root-cause labels used by DEFault++

Some root causes can lead to either explicit failures or silent behavioral faults, depending on how
they are parameterized.
For example, changing an output dimension may cause an immediate
shape error if the output head no longer matches the task loss. The same root cause may also keep
the model runnable while corrupting the output mapping. We discard configurations that crash,
produce invalid tensor shapes, call unsupported backend functions, or create out-of-range indices.
The remaining configurations must pass structural verification, complete feature extraction, and
produce the required training traces.

Each operator has a three-letter ID. The first letter identifies the transformer component (E = Em-
bedding, M = Masking, Q = QKV, S = Score, P = Positional, K = Kernel, V = Variant, C = KV
Cache, F = FFN, N = LayerNorm, R = Residual, O = Output), and the next two letters abbre-
viate the action and its target. For example, QZQ reads as “in the QKV component, Zero the Q
projection.”

The Search Type (ST) column says how DEForm (Section 3.2) chooses values for an operator’s
parameter. B means the operator has no parameter and is either applied or not (e.g., MZM zeroes
the attention mask). EU means the operator takes a numeric parameter and DEForm runs it once
at each value in a list we provide (e.g., ETZ zeroes a configurable percentage of token embeddings).
EL means the operator takes a choice from a fixed categorical set and DEForm runs it once at each
item (e.g., FCA replaces the activation function with each of {ReLU, GELU, Tanh, Sigmoid}).

3.2
DEForm: Fault Injection Mechanism

We denote the clean model parameters by θ and the injected mutant by θ′. We evaluate θ and θ′

Table 1: Attention-specific mutation operators used to construct DEFault-bench

ComponentRoot cause
Operator
ID
Executable Mutation Parameters
ST

Mask application
Zero attention mask
MZM
Replace the valid attention mask with an all-zero mask
of the same shape.

B

Masking

Mask application
Invert attention
mask
MIM
Invert mask semantics while preserving the expected
mask shape and dtype.

B

Mask generation
Reshape mask
incorrectly
MRM
axis: batch or head dimension to misalign; retained only
if broadcast-compatible.

EL

Dynamic mask
Causal-mask break
(decoder)
MCB
visibility: fraction of future keys made visible within the
valid mask tensor.

EU

Parameter
initialization
Zero Q projection
QZQ
Zero the existing query projection weights without
changing tensor shape.

B

Parameter
initialization
Zero K projection
QZK
Zero the existing key projection weights without
changing tensor shape.

B

QKV
Projection

Parameter
initialization
Zero V projection
QZV
Zero the existing value projection weights without
changing tensor shape.

B

Head interaction
Swap Q ↔K
QSW
Swap compatible query and key projection tensors or
outputs.

B

Head interaction
Tie head weights
QTH
heads: subset of existing heads tied while preserving
projection dimensionality.

EL

Freeze QKV
gradients
QFG
Disable updates to existing QKV parameters while
preserving the forward path.

B

Dynamic
parameter
registration

Score
Normalization
Drop 1/√dk scaling
SDS
Remove score scaling while preserving attention-score
shape.

B

Implementation
Apply dropout
pre-softmax
SPD
p: dropout probability applied to score tensors before
softmax.

EU

Precision handling Unsafe fp16 cast
SUC
Cast score computation to fp16; configurations
producing non-finite traces are discarded.

B

Positional
Indexing
Omit positional
embeddings
POE
Remove or zero the positional contribution while
preserving hidden-state shape.

B

Relative position
Shift position
indices
PSI
∆: index shift restricted to valid supported positions.
EU

Interpolation
Truncate positional
support
PTL
cutoff : maximum retained position index; out-of-range
indices are discarded.

EU

Kernel
Silent fallback
Force slow backend
KSB
Force a valid non-optimized attention backend.
B
Feature
constraints
Mismatched
dropout probability
KMD
pcfg, pkern: valid training vs. kernel dropout settings.
EU

KFT
dtype or layout mismatch that triggers a supported
fallback path.

EL

Hardware
incompatibility
Trigger valid
fallback
(dtype/layout)

Variant
Variant
configuration
Single effective head
attention
VSH
Route, tie, or mask heads so only one effective head
remains while preserving output shape.

B

Dynamic dispatch
Causal mask in
encoder
VEC
Apply a broadcast-compatible causal mask in an encoder
attention layer.

B

Cache invalidation Stale cache
CST
layers: subset of layers using stale but shape-compatible
cached K, V states.

EL

KV Cache
(decoder)

Cache-position
Off-by-one indexing
COB
shift: cache index offset restricted to valid cache
positions.

EU

Memory layout
Truncate cache
CTR
length: maximum retained cache length while preserving
the expected cache interface.

EU

Distributed
synchronization
Cross-request leak
CLK
Reuse compatible cached states across requests without
changing cache tensor shape.

B

Table 2: Architecture-level mutation operators used to construct DEFault-bench

ComponentRoot cause
Operator
ID
Executable Mutation Parameters
ST

Embedding
Input
initialization
Zero token
embedding subset
ETZ
percentage: fraction of vocabulary entries zeroed while
preserving embedding shape.

EU

Input type
Swap embedding
pairs
ESW
percentage: fraction of token pairs swapped within the
existing vocabulary.

EU

Input type
Scale segment /
type embedding
ESS
factor: multiplicative scale applied to existing segment
or type embeddings.

EU

Weight scaling
Scale FFN weights
FSW
factor: multiplicative scale on existing W1, W2 tensors.
EU
Neuron dropout
Permanently drop
neurons
FDN
percentage: fraction of hidden neurons zeroed while
preserving FFN shape.

EU

FFN

Activation
function
Change activation
function
FCA
activation: executable replacement nonlinearity
(e.g., GELU →ReLU).

EL

Regularization
Change weight
regularization
FRG
scheme: replacement weight-decay or L2 coefficient
accepted by the optimizer.

EU

Weight
initialization
Change weight
initialization
FWI
init: replacement initialization scheme applied to
existing W1, W2 tensors.

EL

Scale parameter
Scale γ
NSG
factor: multiplicative scale on existing γ parameters.
EU
Scale parameter
Zero γ
NZG
Zero existing γ parameters while preserving LayerNorm
shape.

B

LayerNorm

Bias parameter
Shift β
NSB
shift: additive offset on existing β parameters.
EU
Stability
parameter
Change ϵ
NCE
value: positive numerical-stability constant accepted by
LayerNorm.

EU

Skip connection
Remove skip
connection
RRS
Zero or bypass the residual branch while preserving
sublayer output shape.

B

Residual

Residual scaling
Scale residual
branch
RSR
factor: multiplicative scale on the residual path.
EU

Residual path
Inject Gaussian
noise
RIN
σ: standard deviation of additive noise with matching
tensor shape.

EU

Gradient clipping
Change gradient
clipping
RGC
value: replacement max-norm clip threshold accepted by
the training loop.

EU

Output scaling
Scale output logits
OSL
factor: multiplicative scale on logits while preserving
output dimension.

EU

Output

Output dimension
Zero rows for
selected classes
OZR
classes: subset of existing output rows to zero.
EL

Output type
Reinitialize output
projection
ORI
init: replacement initialization scheme applied to the
existing output projection.

EL

Output dimension
Change output
interface
OOD
dim/map: root-cause-derived output-dimension or
mapping fault; retained only when compatible with the
task loss.

EU

layer indices ℓ⊆{1, . . . , L} where L is the number of transformer blocks, and the severity level
σ ∈{low, medium, high}. The severity controls the magnitude of the injected change for numeric
variants (e.g., scaling factors, dropout rates) and maps to a discrete intensity for non-numeric vari-
ants (e.g., visibility ratio in causal-mask breaking). We use single-fault configurations only (one
target unit, one category, one variant per run) to preserve attribution clarity at Level 2 and Level 3.

Transformer faults affect either stored parameters or runtime computations, which requires two
distinct injection mechanisms (Mahmoud et al., 2020; Humbatova et al., 2021). Static faults modify
parameter tensors at rest, before forward execution. For example, an FFN weight-scaling fault
multiplies the targeted weight matrices by a scalar:




θ′
i =

where params(u, ℓ) selects parameters of unit u in layers ℓ. Static faults include embedding corrup-
tion, parameter scaling, permanent neuron dropout, and LayerNorm parameter changes. Dynamic
faults modify the forward computation path through wrappers or hooks at selected module call
sites. For example, a mask-zeroing fault intercepts the attention call and replaces the mask M by
zeros:

forward′(x, M) = forward(x, 0|M|)
(5)

where 0|M| denotes a zero tensor of the same shape as the original mask M. Dynamic faults include
mask manipulation, Q/K swapping, removal of score scaling, and forced kernel selection. In both
cases, the transformer architecture is unchanged. Only the targeted computation or parameter
values are modified. Figure 4 contrasts the clean and injected execution paths for one representative
example of each mechanism.

(a) Encoder (BERT): Correct

(b) Encoder (BERT): Static Injection

# clean encoder FFN forward pass
layer = model.bert.encoder.layer[layer_idx]
ffn = layer
# same module mutated in (b)
h = ffn.intermediate.dense(hidden_states)
h = ffn.intermediate.intermediate_act_fn(h)
h = ffn.output.dense(h)

# static fault: mutate FFN weights at rest
layer = model.bert.encoder.layer[layer_idx]
ffn = layer
# same module used in (a)
orig_w1 = ffn.intermediate.dense.weight
orig_w2 = ffn.output.dense.weight
self._backup = (orig_w1.clone(), orig_w2.clone())
with torch.no_grad():
orig_w1.mul_(self.alpha)
# scale W1
orig_w2.mul_(self.alpha)
# scale W2

(c) Decoder (GPT): Correct

(d) Decoder (GPT): Dynamic Injection

# clean decoder call (causal behavior intact)
outputs = model(
input_ids=input_ids,
attention_mask=attention_mask,
use_cache=True,
output_attentions=False,
)

# dynamic fault: wrap the same model’s
# attention.forward to weaken causal mask
self._backup_fwd = attention.forward
def faulty_forward(*args, **kwargs):
mask = _get_attention_mask(kwargs)
if mask is not None:

# unmask a fraction of future keys
kwargs["attention_mask"] = \
_weaken_causal_mask(
mask, visibility_ratio)
return self._backup_fwd(
*args, **kwargs)
attention.forward = faulty_forward

Figure 4: Clean and injected execution paths for the same model. Panels (b,d) show static parameter
mutation and dynamic forward wrapping

Decoder-only self-attention is causal by construction. The clean model enforces that token position
i cannot attend to future positions j > i. To inject a causal violation, we weaken or remove the
existing constraint so that queries can attend to future positions. We do not add an additional
causal mask. We replace a configurable fraction of the −∞entries in the upper-triangular region
of the additive mask M with 0, controlled by the severity parameter σ, so each query can attend
to a proportion of keys beyond its own position. We treat causal violations as decoder instances of
attention masking faults.

setup, logging instrumentation, random seed).
Each faulty training run is paired with a clean
training run under the same seed and otherwise identical training conditions. We implement fault
injection with a context manager. The manager stores the original parameter tensors and forward
methods before mutation, applies the fault specified by C, and restores the original state after
evaluation. The context-manager scope prevents carryover effects across configurations.

Before any statistical comparison, we apply a structural verification check. For static faults, we
verify that the parameter difference is restricted to params(u, ℓ) and that its magnitude matches σ
within a relative tolerance of 10−6 to account for floating-point rounding. For dynamic faults, we
verify that hooks or wrappers attach only at the intended module call sites and that the original
forward function is restored after the context manager exits. We also verify execution completeness
by confirming that each configuration produces the required instrumentation logs. Configurations
that fail any check are excluded as structurally invalid.

3.3
Subject Models and Tasks

We use four encoder-only and three decoder-only transformer models spanning 66M–125M param-
eters, 6–12 layers, and both masked and causal language modeling objectives (Devlin et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019; Sanh et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Black et al., 2021). We limit models to at
most 125M parameters to keep all paired runs feasible within our compute budget.

Encoders are fine-tuned on five GLUE classification tasks (Wang et al., 2019) (accuracy as task
metric); decoders are fine-tuned on four language-modeling corpora (Paperno et al., 2016; Marcus
et al., 1993; Merity et al., 2016; Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) (log-perplexity as task metric). Ta-
ble 3 summarizes the models and tasks. All models use the standard Hugging Face Transformers
implementations and default tokenizers.

Table 3: Models and Tasks used to construct the DEFault-bench

Architecture
Model
Parameters
Layers
Tasks

BERT-base (Devlin et al., 2019)
110M
12
SST-2, QNLI, RTE, MRPC, QQP
DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2019)
66M
6
SST-2, QNLI, RTE, MRPC, QQP
RoBERTa-base (Liu et al., 2019)
125M
12
SST-2, QNLI, RTE, MRPC, QQP
DistilRoBERTa (Sanh et al., 2019)
82M
6
SST-2, QNLI, RTE, MRPC, QQP

Encoder

Decoder
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
124M
12
LAMBADA,
PTB,
WikiText-2,
OpenWebText
DistilGPT-2 (Sanh et al., 2019)
82M
6
LAMBADA,
PTB,
WikiText-2,
OpenWebText
GPT-Neo-125M (Black et al., 2021)
125M
12
LAMBADA,
PTB,
WikiText-2,
OpenWebText

Encoder models are fine-tuned on GLUE classification tasks (Wang et al., 2019): SST-2 (sentiment), QNLI (nat-
ural language inference), RTE (textual entailment), MRPC (paraphrase detection), and QQP (duplicate question
detection).
Decoder models are fine-tuned using a language modeling objective on LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016) (word
prediction), PTB (Marcus et al., 1993) (language modeling), WikiText-2 (Merity et al., 2016) (language modeling),
and OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019) (language modeling). All models use the standard Hugging Face
Transformersa implementations and default tokenizers for each checkpoint.

a

Each configuration is run under five fixed seeds S = {42, 123, 456, 789, 101112} (Mosbach et al.,
2021), the smallest design that admits an exact one-sided sign-flip permutation test at α = 0.05
(smallest attainable p-value 1/25 ≈0.031). Layer indices and severity levels low, medium, high
are sampled uniformly to avoid concentration on any single layer or magnitude. After structural
verification, we obtain 3,739 single-fault configurations: 1,891 for encoders and 1,848 for decoders,
with all categories represented. Producing the dataset required 37,390 paired clean and faulty fine-
tuning runs (∼18,600 GPU-hours on NVIDIA A100 and H100 GPUs). Full hyperparameter tables
appear in Section A.

3.4
Mutant Validation

We adopt the statistical mutation-killing framework of Humbatova et al. (2021).
The original
network N and a mutant M are each retrained n times under matched random seeds, and the re-
sulting performance distributions AN(TestS) = ⟨AN1, . . . , ANn⟩and AM(TestS) = ⟨AM1, . . . , AMn⟩
are compared on a held-out test set TestS. The predicate isKilled decides whether the mutant is
killed:

(
true
if p-value
AN(TestS), AM(TestS)
< α,
false
otherwise.
(6)

isKilled(N, M, TestS) =

We use accuracy as the test-set performance metric for encoder classification tasks and log-
perplexity for decoder language modeling tasks (Jahan et al., 2025a).
We set n = 5 matched
seeds and α = 0.05.
Humbatova et al. (2021) use a generalized linear model with n = 20 re-
trainings paired with Cohen’s d effect size; we instead use a one-sided paired sign-flip permutation
test (Good, 2005) on the per-seed deltas, since seed-paired deltas are exchangeable under the null
and five matched seeds are the smallest design that admits an exact one-sided test at α = 0.05.
The smallest attainable p-value with five paired comparisons is 1/25 ≈0.031. We estimate false
positives by applying isKilled to pairs of clean-vs-clean runs.

Following Humbatova et al. (2021), we summarize each mutation operator’s effectiveness using the
mutation score:

MS(MO) = |{c ∈MO : isKilled(N, Mc, TestS)}|

|MO|
(7)

where MO is the set of injected configurations of a mutation operator.
The overall mutation
score is the average of MS(MO) across all operators. For each killed mutant we attach a label
y = (u, f, v, ℓ, σ) that records the target unit, fault category, fault variant, affected layer set, and
severity. We omit m and t because each instance is computed within one model–task context. A
surviving mutant, for which isKilled returns false, is still an injected fault, but its measured effect
does not pass the killing test (p > α). We therefore use surviving mutants as negative examples only
for Level 1 detection and exclude them from Level 2 and Level 3 training. Algorithm 1 summarizes
the per-configuration dataset construction loop.

Algorithm 1 Per-configuration fault injection and validation
Require: Clean model θ, configuration C, seeds S
Ensure: Label isKilled, instance feature vector x

1: θ′ ←Inject(θ, C)
▷static or dynamic mutation

2: if VerifyStructural(θ, θ′, C) = false then return discard

3: end if

4: for s ∈S do

5:
ac
s ←TrainAndEvaluate(θ, s);
af
s ←TrainAndEvaluate(θ′, s)

6: end for

7: p ←SignFlipPermTest({ac
s}, {af
s})
▷one-sided, paired

8: killed ←[ p ≤α ]
▷Equation (6)

9: x ←Aggregate({ac
s}, {af
s})
▷clean-to-faulty deltas

10: return (killed, x)

3.5
Benchmark Statistics

We applied isKilled (Equation (6)) to all 3,739 structurally valid configurations and computed
the mutation score (Equation (7)) per category and per architecture, following Humbatova et al.
(2021). Table 4 reports the per-category mutation scores. Macro-averages assign equal weight to
each model–task pair, while configuration-weighted totals count individual mutants directly.

Table 4: Mutation scores by fault category and architecture under isKilled

Encoder
Decoder

Category
Killed
Surviving
Killed
Surviving

Variant
100.0%
0.0%
28.8%
71.2%
Score
93.8%
6.2%
17.5%
82.5%
QKV
93.0%
7.0%
26.5%
73.5%
Positional
89.3%
10.7%
48.2%
51.8%
FFN
85.1%
14.9%
58.9%
41.1%
Residual
84.5%
15.5%
42.0%
58.0%
LayerNorm
83.5%
16.5%
54.1%
45.9%
Embedding
80.9%
19.1%
54.7%
45.3%
Output
56.9%
43.1%
25.9%
74.1%
Masking
56.8%
43.2%
68.5%
31.5%
Kernel
51.6%
48.4%
68.0%
32.0%
KV Cache
—
—
5.6%
94.4%

Macro-average
79.6%
20.4%
41.3%
58.7%
Configuration-weighted total
84.5%
15.5%
63.9%
36.1%

rations as labeled instances. Killed mutants are labeled faulty and surviving mutants are labeled
correct. Table 5 summarizes the resulting dataset composition.

Table 5: Composition of DEFault-bench

Metric
Encoder
Decoder
Metric
Encoder
Decoder

Total
1,891
1,848
Fault categories
11
12
Faulty
1,598
1,180
Root causes
40
45
Correct
293
668

Category
Encoder
Decoder
Category
Encoder
Decoder

Variant
24
51
LayerNorm
210
185
Score
278
142
Embedding
176
165
QKV
247
184
Output
192
180
Positional
180
179
Masking
70
126
FFN
288
203
Kernel
96
63
Residual
130
167
KV Cache
—
203

Faulty instances are killed mutants; correct instances are surviving mutants. Fault-category counts include both faulty and
correct instances; Level 2 and Level 3 evaluation use only the faulty subset.

Each instance carries labels at three levels of granularity. At Level 1 (fault detection), the label
is binary, faulty or correct. At Level 2 (fault categorization), the label is the injected fault cate-
gory. Encoders use 11 categories: Score, Positional, FFN, QKV, LayerNorm, Residual, Masking,
Embedding, Kernel, Output, and Variant. Decoders use the same 11 plus KV Cache. At Level 3
(root-cause diagnosis), the label is the injected root cause within the fault category. Each category
contains 2–7 root causes, and each root cause belongs to exactly one fault category.

The encoder and decoder subsets are imbalanced. The two architectures differ in their proportion
of faulty and correct instances, and the fault categories (11 on encoders, 12 on decoders) and
their root causes also have different sample sizes. Section 5 describes the evaluation criteria and
class-weighting strategy used to address this imbalance.

4
DEFault++ Diagnostic Technique

4.1
Overview

4.2
Fault Propagation Graph

The fault categories and root causes defined in Section 3 identify where a fault originates, but they
do not describe how a fault in one component affects other components during forward compu-
tation or backward gradient flow. A stale QKV projection, for example, not only corrupts the
projection output but also shifts downstream attention scores, attention weights, and the residual
stream. To capture these inter-component dependencies, we define the Fault Propagation Graph
(FPG), a directed graph derived from the transformer forward pass, backward pass, architectural
configuration, and autoregressive execution.
The FPG serves two purposes in DEFault++: it
structures the feature representation by mapping feature groups to transformer components (Sec-
tion 4.3), and it provides the adjacency matrix for message passing in the diagnostic model (Sec-
tion 4.4.2). Prior DL fault-diagnosis techniques use graph representations for different purposes.
NeuraLint (Nikanjam et al., 2021) encodes a typed meta-model graph for pre-training structural
checks, while FL4Deep (Morovati et al., 2024) ranks root causes using a static and dynamic knowl-
edge graph. In contrast, the FPG models inter-component fault propagation during transformer
training. We test whether the FPG structure matters in RQ3 (Section 5.6) by comparing it against
rewired and random graphs of the same density.

We distinguish seven dependency mechanisms. Mechanisms one to three (M1–M3) describe local
forward propagation. Mechanism four (M4) captures repeated forward propagation across stacked
layers.
Mechanism five (M5) captures backward gradient dependencies.
Mechanism six (M6)
captures architecture-wide interventions that affect multiple components at once. Mechanism seven
(M7) captures temporal dependencies introduced by decoder caching. The current FPG collapses
these mechanisms into unlabeled directed edges. The graph is deterministic since it mirrors the fixed
computational graph of the transformer. Each edge encodes a structural dependency through which
a fault can propagate. Whether a specific fault produces an observable downstream effect depends
on its magnitude, on intervening nonlinear operations (detailed below), and on the parameter
values learned during training. The FPG therefore models possible dependency pathways within
transformer architectures, with edges derived from dependencies in the transformer forward and
backward pass. Section 10 contrasts the FPG with prior graph-based representations in DNN fault
analysis.

We define the FPG G = (V, E) where each node v ∈V represents a transformer component.
The component types are: embedding, positional encoding, QKV projection, score computation,
attention masking, attention weights, attention output, residual connections, LayerNorm, FFN,
and output head. Residual connections and LayerNorm appear independently for each sublayer
(attention and FFN). Decoders additionally include a KV cache node.
Each directed edge
(vi, vj) ∈E indicates that vj depends on vi under the chosen computational, execution, or
architectural abstraction, so a fault at vi can reach vj. An edge (vi, vj) is included when a fault
at vi can directly affect the output of vj through forward data flow, backward gradient flow,
residual identity flow, autoregressive state reuse, or architecture-wide intervention under the chosen
transformer abstraction. The FPG models only transformer components and their dependencies.
Not all diagnostic feature groups are FPG nodes. Model-wide context groups and the cross-layer
observation group participate in the group-level graph through self-loops only (Table 7).

By analyzing the transformer’s forward and backward equations, we identify seven dependency
mechanisms. Let δx denote a perturbation to variable x.

1. M1: Forward sequential propagation. If B = f(A), then δB = (∂f/∂A) δA. Pertur-
bation propagates along the data flow path: embedding →projections →scores →masking
→weights →output →residual →LayerNorm →FFN →residual →output head.
2. M2: Simultaneous propagation. QKV projections feed both score computation (via
Q, K) and attention output (via V ) simultaneously.
A single projection fault therefore
perturbs scores and values at the same time. In decoders, K and V additionally enter the
cache.
3. M3: Residual bypass. In h = x + MHA(x), a perturbation δx appears in h with unit
gain through the skip path. The skip connection therefore carries any change at x to the
residual output even when the sublayer transformation reduces it, although subsequent
normalization may reshape it.
4. M4: Cross-layer propagation. The residual stream provides repeated identity paths
across stacked layers (Roquet et al., 2024). A change at layer ℓcan therefore reach later
representations, although intervening normalization and nonlinear operations may reduce
or reshape it.
5. M5: Backward pass propagation. A fault that changes the loss L can change ∂L/∂θi
for parameters whose computation contributes to that loss term, which can affect weight
updates across multiple components during training.
6. M6: Architecture-wide intervention. Some fault types inherently affect multiple com-
ponents at once. A variant fault (e.g., single-head instead of multi-head attention) simulta-
neously changes the attention computation pattern, parameter shapes, and kernel dispatch.
Unlike Mechanisms 1–5, this is not a propagation relation but a joint structural effect in
which a single architectural change alters multiple components at the same time.
7. M7: Cache propagation across time steps (decoder only). The KV cache stores K
and V across generation steps. A cache fault affects the current token and all future tokens.

Three nonlinear operations limit propagation at specific edges.
Softmax maps deviations into
[0, 1] with a sum-to-one constraint, which reduces large-magnitude shifts. LayerNorm (Ba et al.,
2016) rescales outputs to zero mean and unit variance, which removes additive shifts. Activation
functions (e.g., ReLU, GELU) suppress changes in their saturation regions and pass them in their
linear regions. We annotate these limiting operations on the corresponding edges of the FPG.

The seven mechanisms fall into three classes (see Table 6). Propagation relations (Mechanisms 1,
2, 3, 5, 7) describe how a fault at one component directly reaches another through forward data
flow, residual identity, backward gradient flow, or autoregressive state reuse. Recursive composition
(Mechanism 4) is the repeated application of propagation relations 1 and 3 across stacked layers.
Structural intervention (mechanism six) is a joint structural effect in which a single architectural
change alters multiple components rather than propagating from one to another. Relation-typed
message passing that distinguishes these three classes is a natural extension.

For use in the diagnostic model, we collapse the component-level FPG to a group-level ad-
jacency matrix.
Each transformer component maps to the feature group that measures it,
as shown in Table 7.
A group-level edge exists if any component in the source group has
a propagation edge to any component in the target group.
Components that map to the
same group (e.g., attention masking, attention weights, and attention output all map to the
Attention group) are merged.
Structural groups receive FPG-derived neighbor edges.
The
cross-layer observation group (Representation drift) and model-wide context groups (Training
dynamics, Validation performance) participate through self-loops only: they undergo the same

Table 6: Edge derivation for the Fault Propagation Graph (FPG)

Source
Target
Mechanism Class
Scope
Details

Embedding
QKV Projection
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
Q, K, V = WQ,K,V E[x]
Positional
QKV Projection
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
Position added to embedding before projection
QKV Proj.
Score Comp.
Simultaneous (M2)
Enc/Dec
S = QK⊤/√dk; Q, K from projection
QKV Proj.
Attn. Output
Simultaneous (M2)
Enc/Dec
Attn = softmax(S) V ; V from projection
QKV Proj.
KV Cache
Simultaneous (M2)
Dec
K, V stored in cache at each step
Score Comp.
Attn. Mask
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
S′ = S + M
Attn. Mask
Attn. Weights
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
α = softmax(S′)
Attn. Weights
Attn. Output
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
Attn = α V
Attn. Output
Residual (attn)
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
h = x + Attn(x)
Residual input
Residual (attn)
Residual bypass (M3)
Enc/Dec
Skip connection: δx passes with unit gain
Residual (attn)
LayerNorm
(attn)
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
ˆx = LN(h)

LayerNorm
(attn)
FFN
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
FFN input is post-norm representation

FFN
Residual (FFN)
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
h′ = h + FFN(ˆx)
Residual input
Residual (FFN)
Residual bypass (M3)
Enc/Dec
Skip connection: δh passes with unit gain
Residual (FFN)
LayerNorm
(FFN)
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
ˆh′ = LN(h′)

LayerNorm
(FFN)
Output Head
Forward prop. (M1)
Enc/Dec
Final representation enters output head

Layer ℓresidual
Layer ℓ+1
Cross-layer (M4)
Enc/Dec
Repeated M1+M3 across stacked layers
All components
All components
Backward prop. (M5)
Enc/Dec
∂L/∂θi couples all parameters
KV Cache
Attn. Weights
Cache-time (M7)
Dec
Cached K, V affect future-step attention
Variant config.
Multi
compo-
nents
Intervention (M6)
Enc/Dec
Architectural change alters multiple components

2

learned transformation as structural groups but do not receive information from neighboring
groups. Groups that map to multiple components inherit all edges of their constituent components.

Figure 6 shows the group-level adjacency matrix ˆA for the decoder diagnostic model (G = 13).
The near-diagonal sparsity reflects the sequential data flow through the transformer block. The
off-diagonal entries (e.g., QKV→Cache, Cache→Attention, FFN→Residual) capture the feedback
and branching paths that the FPG encodes. Non-structural groups (Representation drift, Training
dynamics, Validation performance) appear as isolated self-loops in the lower-right block.

4.3
Feature Representation

The Fault Propagation Graph defines which transformer components can affect each other, but
the diagnostic model requires quantitative measurements of those components during training.
Generic DNN fault features such as loss trajectories, gradient statistics, and activation counts
do not distinguish transformer fault categories.
Corrupted QKV projections, missing causal
masks, and misconfigured positional encodings leave end-task metrics untouched but produce
characteristic patterns in attention-level and component-level measurements. We therefore define
a transformer-specific feature space that targets attention distributions, projection alignments,
and residual-stream behavior (see Figure 7). Table 8 lists the feature groups, their metric types,
and the collection branch through which each group enters the feature-construction process.

Embedding
Positional

store 𝐾,𝑉

QKV Projection

KV Cache

V

𝑆′=𝑆+𝑀

Score Computation
Attention Masking

residual skip

softmax

cached 𝐾,𝑉

Attention Weights

Attention Output

Attention Sub-graph

×𝑁layers (M4)

⊕

FFN Sub-graph

LayerNorm

layer norm

residual skip

Feed-Forward Network (FFN)

activation

⊕

LayerNorm

layer norm

Output Head

∇𝜃ℒpropagates in reverse along all edges

▶M1: Forward
- - ▶M2: Simultaneous
▶M3: Residual
⋅⋅⋅▶M5: Gradient

- - ▶M7: Cache-time
{ M4: Cross-layer (brace)
M6: Intervention (not drawn)

Computation
Normalization
Residual Junction (⊕)
I/O
Auxiliary

softmax , layer norm , activation = nonlinear operations that limit fault propagation at the annotated edge

Figure 5: Fault Propagation Graph (FPG) for transformer architectures. The loopback denotes M4; the
dashed KV Cache return denotes decoder-only M7. M6 is omitted because it affects multiple components
simultaneously.

Table 7: Feature-group roles and message passing in DEFault++

Feature Group
Role
Scope
Message Passing

Attention
Structural
Attn. masking, weights, output FPG edges
Score
Structural
Score computation
FPG edges
FFN output
Structural
FFN
FPG edges
LayerNorm
Structural
LayerNorm
FPG edges
Residual stream
Structural
Residual connections
FPG edges
QKV alignment
Structural
QKV projection
FPG edges
Embedding
Structural
Embedding
FPG edges
Positional
Structural
Positional encoding
FPG edges
Output
Structural
Output head
FPG edges
Cache (decoder)
Structural
KV cache
FPG edges

Representation drift
Cross-layer observation Inter-layer residual path
Self-loop only

Training dynamics
Model-wide context
Model-wide optimization
Self-loop only
Validation performance Model-wide context
Model-wide output quality
Self-loop only

Target group

QKV Alignment

Residual Stream

Training Dyn.

FFN Output

LayerNorm

Embedding

Repr. Drift

Positional

Task Perf.

Attention

Output

Cache

Score

Embedding

Positional

QKV Alignment

Non-structural
Structural

Score

Attention

Source group

Residual Stream

LayerNorm

FFN Output

Output

Cache

Repr. Drift

Training Dyn.

Task Perf.

FPG edge
Self-loop

Figure 6: Group-level adjacency matrix ˆA for the decoder diagnostic model

A1-Attention.
We measure seven properties of the post-softmax attention distribution at each
sampled layer (six for encoders, seven for decoders).

–Attention entropy (Hattn) computes the Shannon entropy of the attention distribution, averaged
across heads and query positions (Voita et al., 2019). Low entropy indicates that a head concentrates
on a single position. High entropy indicates a near-uniform distribution.

–Padding attention mass (PadMass) computes the fraction of attention directed at padding tokens.
Non-zero padding mass indicates a masking fault.

Table 8: Feature groups, metric types, and feature dimensions in DEFault++

Feature Group
Metric Types
ng

Layer-internal metrics (Cint, collected at each training step, per layer)

Attention
Attention entropy, padding attention mass, inter-head cosine similarity, head utilization, attention
rank, cross-example leakage, future attention mass (decoder only)
6/7a

Score
Pre-softmax score
1

FFN output
FFN output norm
1

LayerNorm
Scale parameter norm, post-norm distribution
2

Residual stream
Residual cosine similarity
1

Repr. drift
CKA layer similarity
1

QKV alignment
Q–K sim., Q–V sim., K–V sim.
3

Gradient metrics (Copt, collected at each training step)

Optimization
Gradient and update features (gradient norm, update ratio, update activity)
21

Behavioral metrics (Ctrain, collected at each training step)

Embedding
Embedding norm, token-level variance
2

Positional
Positional sensitivity
1

Training dyn.
Loss trajectory, gradient noise scale, step time, peak memory allocation
4

Output
Prediction confidence, output entropy, margin statistics
3

Cache
Cache hidden similarity, cache distribution divergence
2

Validation metrics (Ceval, collected at epoch end or validation checkpoints)

Validation perf.
Task accuracy / perplexity, calibration error
2

a6 for encoders, 7 for decoders (future attention mass applies only to decoders).

–Head utilization is the fraction of heads whose attention entropy exceeds a minimum threshold,
indicating the head attends to more than one position. Variant faults that reduce the effective head
count lower this fraction (Voita et al., 2019; Clark et al., 2019).

–Attention rank quantifies the effective dimensionality of each head’s attention weight matrix as the
exponential of the Shannon entropy of its normalized singular value distribution (Roy & Vetterli,
2007): EffRank(Ai) = exp(−Pn
k=1 ˜σk log ˜σk), where ˜σk is the k-th singular value normalized to
sum to one. A rank near 1 indicates a low-dimensional attention pattern dominated by a single
singular component. A rank approaching n indicates a broader singular value spectrum across
query positions. Variant faults that reduce effective multi-head capacity lower the metric, while
faults that introduce more diffuse high-dimensional structure may raise it.

–Cross-example leakage measures the total attention weight flowing between unrelated examples
in the same batch, averaged over heads and layers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dao et al., 2022). Under
correct masking, this quantity is zero.
Non-zero values indicate that the attention mechanism
attends across example boundaries, which is a direct indicator of masking faults.

–Future attention mass (decoder only) measures the total attention weight assigned from each
query position to future key positions, averaged over heads and layers (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Under correct causal masking, this quantity is near zero, and causal-mask violations increase it
systematically.

s = QK⊤/
p

dk
(8)

At each layer, we reduce the full query-key score matrix to a single scalar by computing its mean
across all positions (Dong et al., 2021). This within-layer reduction precedes the cross-layer aggre-
gation (Aℓ) described above. High score variance across layers indicates that attention sharpness
differs substantially between early and late layers, which can result from softmax saturation and
reduced gradient flow (Dong et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2023b). Pre-softmax scores are sensitive to
Score and Positional faults because both fault types directly alter this computation.

A3-FFN output.
We record the ℓ2 norm of the feed-forward sublayer outputs at each layer,
computed as ∥FFN(x)∥2 per token and averaged across the batch. Abnormally large norms indicate
instability in the FFN transformation. Near-zero norms indicate that the FFN sublayer contributes
little to the residual stream, which can occur when activation functions suppress most dimensions.

A4-LayerNorm.
We record two properties of layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) at each layer.
Scale parameter norm is the Frobenius norm ∥γ∥F of the learned scale vector. Post-norm distribu-
tion captures the moments of the normalized output:

ˆx = γ ⊙x −µ

σ + ϵ + β
(9)

A LayerNorm fault disrupts the rescaling and produces post-norm moments or γ magnitudes outside
the range seen in clean training runs.

A5-Residual stream.
We compute the cosine similarity between the input and output of each
residual sublayer:

res_simℓ=
xℓ· hℓ
∥xℓ∥∥hℓ∥
(10)

where xℓis the sublayer input and hℓ= xℓ+ f(xℓ) is the residual output at layer ℓ. In a correctly
functioning transformer, the skip connection preserves the input direction while the sublayer f
adds a bounded change, so cosine similarity remains close to 1.0. A Residual fault that corrupts
the skip-connection path reduces this similarity. This metric measures the effect of a fault within
a single sublayer (input vs. output of the same residual block).

A6-Representation drift.
We compute Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al.,
2019) between consecutive layer representations:

CKA(Hℓ, Hℓ+1) =
∥H⊤
ℓ+1Hℓ∥2
F
∥H⊤
ℓHℓ∥F ∥H⊤
ℓ+1Hℓ+1∥F
(11)

A7-QKV alignment.
We compute pairwise cosine similarity between the query, key, and value
projection outputs at each sampled layer:

sim(Q, K) =
Q · K
∥Q∥∥K∥,
sim(Q, V ) =
Q · V
∥Q∥∥V ∥,
sim(K, V ) =
K · V
∥K∥∥V ∥
(12)

where Q = WQx, K = WKx, and V = WV x are the projection outputs for input x (Vaswani et al.,
2017). A fault that corrupts one projection weight matrix shifts its output direction relative to
the other two, producing a measurable drop in pairwise similarity.

B. Gradient metrics (Copt, collected per component at each training step).

For each parameterized component (e.g., Attention, QKV, FFN, LayerNorm, Embedding), we
compute three gradient-level measurements inspired by prior DNN fault detection work (Jahan
et al., 2025b; Cao et al., 2022). Gradient norm computes the ℓ2 norm of the gradient vector for all
parameters belonging to that component:

gc =
s X

θ∈Θc
∥∇θL∥2
(13)

where Θc is the parameter set of component c. Update ratio measures the relative magnitude of
weight change between consecutive training steps:

uc = ∥W (t)
c
−W (t−1)
c
∥F
∥W (t−1)
c
∥F + ϵ
(14)

where W (t)
c
is the weight matrix of component c at step t. Update activity is a binary flag indicating
whether the gradient norm exceeds a minimum threshold (gc > 10−6), which identifies components
that have stopped learning. These 15 component-level measurements (three per component) to-
gether with six global gradient statistics form the Copt = 21 gradient metrics in Table 8. The
Output group uses behavioral metrics only and does not add a sixth component-routed gradient
set.

Gradient metrics do not form a separate FPG node. Each component-level gradient measurement
is appended to the feature group of its corresponding component (Attention, QKV alignment,
FFN output, LayerNorm, Embedding).
The six global gradient statistics are appended to the
Training dynamics group. The message-passing graph therefore contains 12 groups for encoders
and 13 for decoders, as listed in Table 7.

C. Behavioral metrics (Ctrain, collected at each training step).

C1-Embedding.
We record two properties of the input embedding vectors. Embedding norm
is the mean ℓ2 norm 1

C2-Positional.
We measure positional sensitivity as the model’s response to a fixed non-zero
shift in position indices on a held-out batch. In all experiments, we set ∆= 1. Let Pmax denote the
model’s maximum supported position index, and let I(X) be the set of valid non-padding token
positions in batch X such that i + ∆< Pmax. For each i ∈I(X), we compare the hidden state
at position i under the original indices with the hidden state at the same token position under the
shifted indices. We define positional sensitivity as

L
X

Spos(X) =
1
L |I(X)|

hℓ,i(X) −h(∆)
ℓ,i (X)



2
(15)

X

ℓ=1

i∈I(X)

where L is the number of instrumented layers. Tokens that would exceed the valid index range after
shifting are excluded from the average; we do not clip, wrap, or reuse position indices. Larger values
indicate stronger dependence of the model’s representations on positional information. Positional
faults that omit, misalign, or truncate positional encoding shift this quantity away from the clean
baseline.

C3-Training dynamics.
We record four optimization-level and infrastructure-level metrics at
each training step. Loss trajectory is the scalar training loss per step. Gradient noise scale measures
the ratio of gradient variance to the squared gradient norm (McCandlish et al., 2018):

GNS = Var(∥∇L∥)

E[∥∇L∥]2
(16)

computed over a rolling window of 20 training steps.
High gradient noise scale indicates that
individual batches produce inconsistent gradient directions. Step time is the wall-clock duration
of each training step. Sudden increases in step time can indicate memory pressure or scheduling
faults. Peak memory allocation records the peak GPU memory reported by the CUDA allocator
during each training step (NVIDIA, 2021; Chakrabarti et al., 2012). A forced fallback to a non-
optimized kernel or an unintended data-layout change can increase peak memory without raising
an explicit error (Dao et al., 2022). We include peak memory alongside step time because both are
infrastructure-level measurements that detect kernel and scheduling faults.

C4-Output.
We record three properties of the output head at each training step. Prediction
confidence computes the mean maximum softmax probability
1
N
PN
i=1 maxc p(i)
c
across all samples
in the batch.
Output entropy computes the mean Shannon entropy of the output distribution
−1

N
PN
i=1
P
c p(i)
c log p(i)
c . Margin statistics measure the gap between the correct-class logit and the
strongest competing logit.
For encoder classification tasks, we compute these metrics over the
classification logits per batch sample. For decoder language modeling tasks, we average over non-
padding tokens within each sequence, where margin measures the gap between the logit of the true
next token and the highest competing logit. Low confidence, high entropy, or negative margins
indicate that the output head does not produce well-separated predictions, whether because of
upstream faults or direct output-projection faults.

Cache distribution divergence computes the KL divergence:

v
Pcache(v) log Pcache(v)

DKL(Pcache∥Pfresh) =
X

Pfresh(v)
(17)

between the next-token distribution produced using the cache (Pcache) and the distribution
produced by fresh computation (Pfresh). Non-zero divergence indicates that cached states produce
different predictions, which is a direct indicator of KV Cache faults.

D. Validation metrics (Ceval, collected at epoch end or validation checkpoints).

We record two measurements at epoch end or at scheduled validation checkpoints. Task accuracy
is classification accuracy for encoder tasks and perplexity for decoder language modeling tasks.
Calibration error is the expected calibration error (Guo et al., 2017):

B
X

|b|
N

acc(b) −conf(b)

(18)

ECE =

b=1

where B is the number of confidence bins. Faults that degrade downstream performance produce
abnormal values in these metrics. Faults that shift internal behavior without affecting validation
performance (task-invisible faults) produce normal values in this group but abnormal values in
other groups. Since these metrics are computed at epoch boundaries rather than at each training
step, they enter the feature-construction process after the epoch-level summary stage (Table 8).

Figure 7: DEFault++ feature construction (raw metric to the fixed-length feature vector)

4.3.1
Aggregation & Feature Vector Construction

2016; Xiong et al., 2020), and residual propagation (Roquet et al., 2024) vary qualitatively across
layers. We therefore measure Cint = 15 (encoder) or Cint = 16 (decoder) layer-internal metric types
at each layer independently (Table 8). The decoder count is higher because future attention mass
applies only to decoder architectures. The remaining metrics are collected at the step level or epoch
level. Gradient metrics (Copt = 21) record gradient norm, update ratio, and update activity across
parameterized components and global gradients. Behavioral metrics (Ctrain = 10 for encoders,
12 for decoders) measure model-wide properties such as training loss, output-head behavior, posi-
tional sensitivity under controlled position shifts, and peak memory allocation. Validation metrics
(Ceval = 2) record accuracy or perplexity and calibration error at epoch boundaries.

To create a fixed-length representation regardless of model depth, we aggregate per-layer layer-
internal metrics into five summary statistics (Aℓ= 5: early mean, early standard deviation, mid
mean, mid standard deviation, and final-layer value). A 6-layer and a 12-layer model therefore
produce the same number of features per group. Step-level metrics (gradient and behavioral) skip
this aggregation. After layer aggregation produces dstep = AℓCint +Copt +Ctrain step-level features,
we apply two further aggregation stages to convert variable-length training runs into a fixed-length
vector.

Epoch-level
summary
(Ae
=
3).
Following
prior
work
on
step-level
training
met-
rics (Ben Braiek & Khomh, 2023; Wardat et al., 2021), we aggregate step-level values within each
training epoch into three statistics: epoch mean, epoch standard deviation, and a burst statistic
(the 95th-percentile or maximum value). These statistics capture micro-level training behavior
within a single pass over the data. Abnormal within-epoch variance can reveal batch-level issues
such as gradient instability (Ben Braiek & Khomh, 2023) or data-complexity mismatches (War-
dat et al., 2021) that disappear when only the final epoch value is recorded. Validation metrics
(Ceval = 2) enter at this stage because they are collected at epoch end or at validation checkpoints.
The epoch-level vector has dimensionality depoch = Ae dstep + Ceval.

Training-phase summary (Ap = 5).
We partition the epoch sequence into three training phases
(early, mid, final) and compute the mean within each phase, a linear-regression slope across phases,
and the final-epoch value. Together these five statistics per metric compose Ap = 5. The slope
captures the macro-level trajectory of the training process. A fault that causes learning-rate decay
to stall (Zhang et al., 2021), or that traps the optimizer in a suboptimal region (Wardat et al.,
2021), produces a characteristic slope pattern that a single-epoch snapshot would miss. Final values
capture faults whose effect is visible only at convergence, independent of the trajectory shape.

Feature vector length.
Layer-internal metrics (Cint) pass through layer aggregation (Aℓ= 5)
before the epoch-level and training-phase summaries. Gradient and behavioral metrics skip layer
aggregation. Validation metrics enter after the epoch-level summary. The raw feature vector length
before filtering is

dfinal = Ap(Ae(AℓCint + Copt + Ctrain) + Ceval) .
(19)

For encoders, Cint = 15, Copt = 21, Ctrain = 10, and Ceval = 2, giving

For decoders, Cint = 16 because decoder features add future attention mass, and Ctrain = 12
because they add two cache metrics, giving

dfinal = 5 × (3 × (5 × 16 + 21 + 12) + 2) = 5 × (3 × 113 + 2) = 5 × 341 = 1705.

We apply coefficient-of-variation filtering (CV < 0.01) to remove near-constant columns.
The
fixed-length feature vector serves as input to the diagnostic model (Section 4.4).

4.4
Diagnostic Model

Figure 8: DEFault++ inference hierarchy for fault detection, categorization, and root-cause diagnosis

Algorithm 2 summarizes the diagnosis and explanation flow for one input instance. It shows the
three-level gating logic and the explanation derivation; the shared encoding is defined in Sec-
tions 4.4.1 to 4.4.2.

4.4.1
Feature-Group Encoding

We encode each feature group with a dedicated MLP. We keep groups structurally separate so
that FPG message passing can mix information across them and the explanation step can examine
each group’s embedding independently. We use trainable MLPs rather than a flat classifier because
the prototype-distance objective and the contrastive separation loss both require gradients to flow
through the group-level weights during training. As encoder and decoder architectures differ in the
number of feature groups (G = 12 vs. G = 13), we train separate encoder and decoder diagnostic
models. Given the feature vector z ∈Rd partitioned into G groups {zg1, . . . , zgG} (see Table 8),
each group g is encoded by a dedicated MLP (Equation (20)).

hg = MLPg(zg) ∈Rh,
g = 1, . . . , G,
(20)

where h = 32 is the hidden dimension per group (selected via grid search on the inner validation
fold). The group embeddings form the matrix H = [h1; . . . ; hG] ∈RG×h.

Algorithm 2 DEFault++ hierarchical diagnosis for one input instance

Input: Feature vector x; shared encoder producing group embeddings {hg}G
g=1 and projection
zproj; trained prototypes {πc,r}
Output: Detection label ˆy; if faulty: fault category ˆc, root cause ˆr, and per-group importance
scores {wg}G
g=1

Level 1: Fault Detection

1: Classify the instance as faulty or clean: ˆy ←Detect(zproj)

2: if ˆy = clean then

3:
return ˆy
▷clean instances exit here; Levels 2–3 are not called

4: end if

Level 2: Fault Categorization

5: Assign the fault to a transformer component category: ˆc ←Categorize(zproj)

Level 3: Root-Cause Diagnosis

6: for each root cause r in the predicted category Rˆc do

7:
Sum squared distances to prototype r across all feature groups: dr ←PG
g=1∥hg −πˆc,r,g∥2

8: end for

9: Select the nearest prototype as the predicted root cause: ˆr ←arg minr∈Rˆc dr

Explanation

10: Identify the nearest alternative root cause: ˜r ←arg minr∈Rˆc\{ˆr} dr
11: for each feature group g = 1, . . . , G do

12:
Compute how much group g favors ˆr over ˜r: ∆g ←dg(πˆc,˜r) −dg(πˆc,ˆr)

13:
Normalize
positive
contributions
into
importance
score:
wg
←
max(∆g, 0) / P
g′ max(∆g′, 0)

14: end for

15: return ˆy, ˆc, ˆr, {wg}G
g=1

where e = 64 is the embedding dimension and vec(H) ∈RGh denotes the row-major vectorization.
Levels 1 and 2 use the pooled projection zproj for detection and categorization. Level 3 uses the
group embedding matrix H directly to preserve group-level structure for root-cause separation and
group-level explanation (Section 4.6).

4.4.2
Message Passing in the Fault Propagation Graph

We update each group embedding by aggregating information from neighboring groups in the FPG.
We construct the group-level adjacency matrix A ∈RG×G from the component-level FPG (Sec-
tion 4.2) and the mapping in Table 7.
Structural groups receive FPG-derived neighbor edges.
The cross-layer observation group (Representation drift) and model-wide context groups (Train-
ing dynamics, Validation performance) receive self-loops only, meaning they undergo the learned
transformation but do not aggregate information from neighboring groups. We compute updated
group embeddings following graph convolutional networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017):

where ˆA is the row-normalized adjacency matrix (with self-loops) and Wmsg ∈Rh×h.
We use
row normalization rather than symmetric normalization because structural feature groups differ in
the number of FPG propagation connections. Row normalization prevents high-degree groups from
over-averaging their neighbors. The updated group embeddings H′ replace the pre-message-passing
H in both the projection and the Level 3 prototype matching. We apply three rounds of message
passing, each with a dedicated learnable weight matrix. Three rounds is also the diameter of the
FPG: any node can reach any other node within three steps along the propagation edges, so this
depth is enough to combine information across the full graph without entering the deeper regime
where graph convolutional networks tend to oversmooth (Li et al., 2018). We selected this number
through grid search on the inner validation fold (Section B).

For example, a QKV projection fault propagates to attention scores and the residual stream ac-
cording to Mechanisms 1 and 2. Message passing along these edges aggregates that multi-group
information into the QKV alignment embedding before classification.
The model-wide context
groups are transformed independently, without exchanging with neighbors, and contribute through
the projection and prototype comparison steps.

4.4.3
Hierarchical Classification

All three classification levels share one encoder (group encoding, FPG message passing, and
projection) rather than one per level.
Sharing reduces parameters and training cost.
Message
passing over a 12–13-node graph with 32-dimensional embeddings is negligible relative to the
upstream transformer training.
The FPG also encodes structural dependencies between trans-
former components.
A fault in one component (e.g., QKV projection) can shift measurements
in downstream components (e.g., attention scores, residual stream). Message passing aggregates
these cross-component dependencies into each group embedding, which benefits all three levels to
varying degrees. Each level adds a task-specific head.

Level 1: Fault detection. A two-layer MLP maps zproj to binary logits (faulty vs. correct).

Level 2: Fault categorization. A two-layer MLP maps zproj to C-class logits, where C = 11 for
encoders and C = 12 for decoders. During training, the class-weighted cross-entropy is computed
only over samples labeled faulty.

Level 3: Root-cause diagnosis. Level 3 discriminates among the 2–7 root causes within a fault
category. Per-root-cause training support ranges from fewer than 10 samples (e.g., Variant encoder)
to approximately 80, with an average of 42 per root cause for encoders and 26 for decoders. A
standard softmax classifier risks overfitting to majority root causes in this setting. It also gives
one prediction score for the whole input, which does not show how each feature group supports
the diagnosis.
We therefore combine a cross-entropy head with a prototypical classifier (Snell
et al., 2017; Kamp & Partee, 1995).
The prototypical classifier compares each sample with
class-mean embeddings instead of learning a separate weight vector for each class. Its distance
score can also be broken down by feature group, which supports the explanation step in Section 4.6.

category matches the category under training. Negative samples for Level 3 are the other root
causes within the same category, not samples from different categories.

Second, a prototypical classifier (Snell et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2022) operates in the group embedding
space H ∈RG×h (not the logit space). Distances in H are converted to class logits through the
prototype-matching loss (Equation (28)). Let Dc,r denote the set of training samples with category
c and root cause r. For each root cause r within category c, we compute a prototype πc,r as the
mean group embedding (Equation (23)).

πc,r =
1
|Dc,r|

i∈Dc,r
Hi ∈RG×h.
(23)

X

The distance from a sample to a prototype decomposes additively by group (Equation (24)).

G
X

G
X

g=1
∥hg −πc,r,g∥2 =

d(H, πc,r) =

g=1
dg,
(24)

where dg = ∥hg −πc,r,g∥2 is the squared distance contributed by group g.

Level 3 predicts the root cause whose prototype is nearest: ˆr = arg minr∈Rc d(H, πc,r). Because the
distance decomposes additively by group (Equation (24)), the prediction also admits a per-group
explanation, which Section 4.6 defines.

At inference, Level 3 runs only after Level 2 predicts a fault category, and root-cause diagnosis
is restricted to that category. The per-category cross-entropy heads are used during training to
provide auxiliary gradient information for the shared encoder. At inference we use the prototype
classifier because its distances decompose by group, which supports the group-level explanation in
Section 4.6.

Figure 9: DEFault++ training process with shared feature processing and four loss components

4.5
Training Objective

We design a four-term training objective. Two terms are standard cross-entropy heads for fault de-
tection and fault categorization. The other two terms target Level 3 root-cause separation. Level 3
introduces a new training formulation for fault diagnosis that combines supervised contrastive
learning (Khosla et al., 2020) with prototype matching (Snell et al., 2017). The contrastive part
encourages samples with the same root cause to stay close in the learned space and samples with
different root causes to stay apart. The prototype-matching part then compares each sample with
the learned prototype of each root cause and assigns the closest match. This formulation differs
from prior DL fault detection and diagnosis techniques by using both root-cause separation and
prototype-based matching in the same training objective. We test the effect of the separation loss
in RQ3 (Section 5.6).

DEFault++ uses a hierarchical architecture at inference (Level 1 filters before Level 2, Level 2
filters before Level 3) but trains the shared encoding pathway jointly across all three levels. We
adopt joint training with hard parameter sharing (Caruana, 1997; Ruder, 2017) rather than training
independent encoders per level. The dataset contains only 3,739 instances and the per-root-cause
sample counts are limited (Section 3). Independent training would fragment this limited gradient
information across separate encoders. Joint training is feasible because the three tasks are nested.
Every Level 3 sample is also a Level 2 and Level 1 sample, and gradient directions across levels re-
inforce each other rather than opposing each other. The Level 2 loss encourages category-separable
embeddings, and the Level 3 separation loss imposes within-category structure. Both also improve
Level 1 detection, since a more structured embedding space produces a cleaner binary boundary.

Each level uses a dedicated loss, and all losses are computed at the mini-batch level.
Level 1
uses binary cross-entropy Ldetect over all samples in the batch. Level 2 uses class-weighted cross-
entropy Lcat over fault categories, applied to faulty samples only. Level 3 uses two losses jointly:
per-category cross-entropy Lrc over root causes, and a root-cause separation loss Lsep that helps
separate root causes within each category.

Cross-entropy trains per-category heads but does not explicitly structure the embedding space for
within-category separation. We therefore define Lsep with two components. The first is a contrastive
term that operates on the flattened group embeddings vec(H). For each sample i with category
label ci and root-cause label ri, positive pairs share both (ci, ri), while negative pairs share ci but
differ in root cause. Following supervised contrastive learning (Khosla et al., 2020), the contrastive
term within category c is

(i,j)∈Pc
log
exp(sim(hi, hj)/τ)
P
k:ck=ci exp(sim(hi, hk)/τ)
(25)

L(c)
ctr = −1

X

|Pc|

where Pc is the set of positive pairs within category c, sim(·, ·) is cosine similarity on the normal-
ized flattened group embeddings, and τ = 0.1 is the temperature. Cosine similarity captures the
directional alignment that the contrastive objective requires (Wang & Liu, 2021; Islam et al., 2023).
The prototype classifier in Equation (24) uses squared Euclidean distance instead, since prototype
matching depends on spatial proximity in the grouped embedding space.

We define the joint training objective LDEFault++ in Equation (26).

where α and λ are level-specific weighting coefficients. During training, we apply the root-cause
separation loss Lsep only to faulty samples within their ground-truth fault category. At inference,
Level 3 uses the predicted category from Level 2. The separation loss is defined as

Lsep = β Lctr + γ Lpm
(27)

where Lctr is the contrastive term from Equation (25), and Lpm is a prototype-matching loss defined
as

i∈B
log
exp(−d(Hi, πci,ri)/τp)
P
r′∈Rci exp(−d(Hi, πci,r′)/τp)
(28)

Lpm = −1

X

|B|

where B is the training batch, d(·, ·) is the grouped squared distance from Equation (24), Rci
is the set of root causes within category ci, and τp is a temperature parameter. By converting
negative prototype distances into class logits, Lpm trains H so that the group-level distance gap
(Equation (29)) faithfully reflects the prediction.

We set α = 1.0, λ = 1.0, β = 0.5, and γ = 0.3, where β weights the contrastive term Lctr and γ
weights the prototype-matching term Lpm in Lsep. We selected all four coefficients via grid search
on the inner validation fold (Section B). Training details appear in Section 5.

4.6
FPG-based Explanation

Level 3 predicts the root cause whose prototype is nearest in the grouped embedding space (Sec-
tion 4.4.3). To explain that prediction, we compare the predicted prototype πc,ˆr with the nearest
alternative prototype πc,˜r, where ˜r = arg minr∈Rc\{ˆr} d(H, πc,r). The distance gap between these
two prototypes decomposes additively by group:

∆g = dg(πc,˜r) −dg(πc,ˆr),
g = 1, . . . , G
(29)

where dg(πc,r) = ∥hg −πc,r,g∥2. A positive ∆g means group g is closer to the predicted prototype
than to the nearest alternative, so it favors the predicted root cause. A negative ∆g means the group
favors the alternative. The total gap P
g ∆g equals the difference between the two full prototype
distances, confirming that the decomposition is exact.

To summarize these contributions for visualization, we normalize the positive contributions into an
importance score per group:

wg =
max(∆g, 0)
PG
g′=1 max(∆g′, 0),
g = 1, . . . , G
(30)

Groups with negative contributions receive wg = 0. The importance scores sum to one and highlight
the groups that most support the predicted root cause.

large importance indicates model-wide deviation that corroborates the component-level diagnosis
but does not localize the fault to a specific subsystem. Because wg is computed from distances in
the post-message-passing embedding space, structural groups reflect fault effects as they propagate
across components, while model-wide context groups reflect self-transformed embeddings without
cross-group mixing. The group ablation in RQ4 (Section 5.7) tests this interpretation by ablating
the most important groups and measuring how much the gap decreases.

5
Evaluation

5.1
Research Questions

We evaluate DEFault++ on DEFault-bench using nested grouped cross-validation. Encoder and
decoder architectures are evaluated separately since their feature and label spaces differ.

▶RQ1:
How effective is DEFault++ in detecting, categorizing, and diagnosing transformer
faults?

▶RQ2: How does DEFault++ compare with existing DL fault-detection techniques?

▶RQ3: How do message passing in the Fault Propagation Graph and the root-cause separation
loss contribute to diagnostic performance?

▶RQ4: How faithful are the FPG-based explanations to the root-cause diagnosis?

5.2
Experiment Setup

We use nested grouped cross-validation with k = 5 outer folds. The encoder subset contains 20
model–task pairs (4 models × 5 GLUE tasks) and the decoder subset contains 12 (3 models × 4
language modeling corpora). All instances from the same model–task pair are kept in the same
outer fold to prevent information leakage from correlated traces. Each encoder fold therefore holds
out 4 pairs (20 / 5), and each decoder fold holds out 2 to 3 pairs (12 / 5). Per-seed measurements
are already averaged into one instance per configuration (Section 3), so seed is not a separate
grouping variable at this stage. The inner split uses StratifiedGroupKFold for model selection.
The outer loop evaluates generalization on unseen model–task pairs, while the inner loop selects
model hyperparameters. We restrict all preprocessing (scaling, thresholding, and standardization)
and hyperparameter grid search to the inner training fold.
This design trains 25 models per
architecture (5 outer folds × 5 inner folds). We use the same outer-fold assignments for every
method so that each is tested on the same held-out samples.3 Each outer fold holds out entire
model–task pairs rather than random samples. As a result, a fold-level standard deviation would
mostly reflect which pairs were held out in that split, rather than variability in model training. We
therefore report the model–task-level results directly and include the appendix heatmap (Figure 17)
to show where DEFault++ generalizes well and where performance is lower.

We evaluate DEFault++ using four standard metrics. Let TP, FP, TN, and FN denote the true
positive, false positive, true negative, and false negative counts, respectively. Precision (P) and
recall (R) are defined as

P =
TP
TP + FP,
R =
TP
TP + FN
(31)

The F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall:

F1 = 2 · P · R

P + R
(32)

The class distributions are imbalanced at all three levels. We therefore report Macro-F1 (Naidu
et al., 2023), which averages F1 across classes:

C
X

Macro-F1 = 1

c=1
F1c
(33)

C

where C is the number of classes and F1c is the F1-score for class c. For fault detection (Level 1),
we additionally report AUROC (Bradley, 1997), which measures discriminative ability across all
classification thresholds.

A true positive for fault detection means that a faulty configuration is correctly identified, regardless
of its fault category. A true positive for fault categorization means that the category of the fault is
identified correctly, regardless of the root cause. A true positive for root-cause diagnosis requires
both the Level 2 category and the Level 3 root cause to be identified correctly in the same inference
path.

Baselines.
We compare DEFault++ against four prior techniques only on the Level 1 detection
task. The baselines are evaluated on the same train/test split as DEFault++. Rule-based tech-
niques are executed with their published rule definitions and thresholds after mapping the required
observables to the closest available trace features in our dataset. AutoTrainer’s gradient-threshold
rules map to our Training dynamics group. DeepDiagnosis adds rules that partially overlap with
the Attention and Score groups. For baselines that require training, we train them only on the
Level 1 fault-detection task. In each outer fold, the baseline is trained on the training split of
DEFault-bench and tested on the held-out portion.
We use the model types provided in the
original replication packages (Zhang et al., 2021; Wardat et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2022; Jahan et al.,
2025b).

We keep the original rule thresholds unchanged. Changing them for DEFault-bench would adapt
the baselines to our data, rather than evaluate the methods as prior work reported them. We do not
compare Level 2 or Level 3 results since their labels do not align with our transformer component
categories or root causes (see Table 9).

Table 9: Baseline techniques’ coverage across all three levels

Technique
Paradigm
Detection
Categorization
Root-Cause

AutoTrainer (Zhang et al., 2021)
Rule-based (5 rules)
✓
N/A
N/A
DeepDiagnosis (Wardat et al., 2022)
Rule-based (8 rules)
✓
N/A
N/A
DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022)
Flat ensemble (KNN+DT+RF)
✓
N/A
N/A
DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b)
Hierarchical RF
✓
N/A
N/A

DEFault++
Neural hierarchical
✓
✓
✓

during training. We map each rule to the corresponding features in our dataset and apply
the published thresholds without recalibration. AutoTrainer was able to produce binary
detection decisions but its symptom types do not map to our fault categories.
(ii) DeepDiagnosis (Wardat et al., 2022) extends AutoTrainer to eight symptom rules (adding
unchanged weights, saturated activation, and out-of-range output) with a decision tree that
maps detected symptoms to seven fix types. We apply the same feature-mapping strategy
and thresholds. Its symptom labels likewise do not map to our fault categories.
(iii) DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022) combines KNN, Decision Tree, and Random Forest classifiers
with union voting to diagnose faults from runtime features. Its five diagnosis classes (e.g.,
incorrect learning rate, wrong activation function) do not correspond to our fault categories.
We evaluate DeepFD as a binary classifier for fault detection only.
(iv) DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b) uses a hierarchical Random Forest classifier that combines
static and dynamic features to detect and categorize faults across seven coarse DNN-level
categories (hyperparameters, activation function, loss function, optimizer, layer configura-
tion, regularization, weights). These categories operate at a different abstraction level. We
evaluate DEFault for binary detection only.

5.3
Implementation

We implement the hierarchical model in PyTorch. We use separate MLPs for each feature group
with hidden dimension h = 32 and a shared projection to e = 64 dimensions. We apply three
rounds of message passing in the Fault Propagation Graph with the group-level adjacency matrix.
Training uses Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with learning rate 10−3, weight decay 10−4, and batch
size 256. We train for up to 150 epochs with early stopping on the validation split. The loss weights
are α = 1.0, λ = 1.0, β = 0.5, and γ = 0.3, with temperature τ = 0.1. We address fault-category
and root-cause imbalance through inverse-frequency weighting in the corresponding classification
losses and select a fixed set of random seeds for reproducibility. Section B (Table 27) gives the full
hyperparameter configuration. The replication package (Jahan, 2026) contains the implementation,
hyperparameter files, and trained models.

Training loss converges by ∼epoch 100, at which point validation Detection F1 and Category F1
also stabilize (Figures 10 and 11). Training with early stopping at 150 epochs is sufficient for the
three-level hierarchy.

Figure 10: Training dynamics for DEFault++ on the encoder architecture

Figure 11: Training dynamics for DEFault++ on the decoder architecture

5.4
Answering RQ1: Effectiveness of Diagnosis

To answer RQ1, we evaluate DEFault++ at the three diagnostic levels: fault detection (Level 1),
fault categorization (Level 2), and root-cause diagnosis (Level 3). Encoder and decoder architec-
tures are evaluated separately because their feature groups and label spaces differ.

Table 10: DEFault++ performance on fault detection (Level 1)

Metric
Encoder Decoder

AUROC
0.9660
0.9620
Accuracy
0.9455
0.9107
Macro-F1
0.8238
0.9088
Weighted-F1
0.9477
0.9104
Precision
0.8014
0.9125
Recall
0.8520
0.9064

Figure 12: ROC curves for fault detection on encoder and decoder

1993), WikiText-2 (Merity et al., 2016), and OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019)) introduced
in the benchmark construction (Section 3).

Table 11: DEFault++ performance (overall) on fault categorization (Level 2)

Metric
Encoder
Decoder

Accuracy
0.8522
0.8842
Macro-F1
0.8497
0.8679
Weighted-F1
0.8531
0.8850
Precision
0.8662
0.8794
Recall
0.8403
0.8649

Table 12: DEFault++ performance (per-class) on fault categorization (Level 2)

Encoder
Decoder

Category
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall

Embedding
0.838
0.852
0.829
0.862
0.833
0.897
FFN
0.836
0.807
0.871
0.718
0.673
0.777
Kernel
0.771
0.814
0.740
0.765
0.848
0.700
KV Cache
—
—
—
0.758
0.716
0.822
LayerNorm
0.790
0.775
0.820
0.843
0.937
0.766
Masking
0.917
0.952
0.886
0.890
0.927
0.857
Output
0.889
0.927
0.864
0.975
0.980
0.969
Positional
0.919
0.950
0.891
0.927
0.949
0.911
QKV
0.825
0.863
0.792
0.789
0.772
0.815
Residual
0.961
0.965
0.958
0.995
0.995
0.995
Score
0.861
0.847
0.876
0.946
0.937
0.957
Variant
0.741
0.776
0.717
0.948
0.986
0.914

Macro avg.
0.850
0.866
0.840
0.868
0.879
0.865

Fault categorization (Level 2).
DEFault++ achieved Macro-F1 of 0.850 on encoders and
0.868 on decoders (Table 11). Precision and recall remained balanced (0.866/0.840 on encoders,
0.879/0.865 on decoders), which indicates that the model did not trade one for the other. Table 12
reports the per-category breakdown.

Residual and Positional were the strongest categories. Residual reached F1 of 0.961 on encoders and
0.995 on decoders, because the residual-stream feature group produced separable skip-connection
measurements for the faults in this category. Positional reached 0.919 and 0.927 because positional-
sensitivity features distinguished encoding faults from other categories. The weakest categories
differed by architecture. On encoders, Variant (0.741) and Kernel (0.771) reported the lowest F1.
On decoders, FFN (0.718) and KV Cache (0.758) were the most difficult. Variant differed sharply
across architectures (F1 0.741 encoder vs. 0.948 decoder). One explanation is sample size. Encoder
Variant had 24 instances (Table 5), the smallest category, while decoder Variant had 51 instances
and may have benefited from cache-related discriminative features that are absent on encoders.

Table 13: DEFault++ performance (overall) on root-cause diagnosis (Level 3)

Metric
Encoder
Decoder

Accuracy
0.7953
0.8264
Macro-F1
0.8512
0.8670
Weighted-F1
0.8567
0.8745
Precision
0.9407
0.9475
Recall
0.7932
0.8225

Table 14: DEFault++ performance (per-category) on root-cause diagnosis (Level 3)

Encoder
Decoder

Category
F1
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.
F1
Acc.
Prec.
Rec.

Embedding
0.879
0.805
0.972
0.806
0.877
0.890
0.972
0.816
FFN
0.804
0.808
0.847
0.778
0.883
0.777
1.000
0.803
Kernel
0.814
0.740
1.000
0.706
0.747
0.691
0.988
0.676
KV Cache
—
—
—
—
0.881
0.822
1.000
0.817
LayerNorm
0.821
0.748
0.917
0.749
0.890
0.749
0.969
0.839
Masking
0.925
0.871
0.986
0.874
0.845
0.755
0.902
0.801
Output
0.882
0.825
0.958
0.822
0.972
0.969
1.000
0.947
Positional
0.930
0.884
0.992
0.886
0.975
0.911
1.000
0.953
QKV
0.765
0.693
0.868
0.694
0.646
0.629
0.727
0.592
Residual
0.908
0.880
0.927
0.895
0.958
0.955
0.961
0.955
Score
0.835
0.779
0.879
0.799
0.908
0.897
0.926
0.897
Variant
0.799
0.717
1.000
0.717
0.824
0.871
0.925
0.773

Macro avg.
0.851
0.795
0.941
0.793
0.867
0.826
0.948
0.823

feature patterns.

The strongest categories for root-cause diagnosis were Positional (0.930 encoder, 0.975 decoder),
Masking (0.925 encoder, 0.845 decoder), and Residual (0.908 encoder, 0.958 decoder). Positional
root causes produced distinct patterns in positional-sensitivity, attention-entropy, and pre-softmax
score features.
Residual root causes were distinguished because skip-connection integrity and
gradient-norm features produced non-overlapping distributions across root causes within that cate-
gory. QKV was the weakest category, with F1 of 0.765 on encoders and 0.646 on decoders, because
three of its four root causes disturbed the same projection, alignment, and update-flow measure-
ments simultaneously. Root-cause count alone did not explain the per-category ordering. Residual
remained strong with five root causes because its features were well separated, while QKV remained
weakest with four root causes because most of them activated the same feature groups. This pattern
suggests that per-category difficulty depended more on feature separability than on the number of
root causes.

Hierarchical design.
The hierarchical setup links the three levels at inference. Level 1 errors
prevent a configuration from reaching Level 2, and Level 2 errors prevent it from reaching Level 3.
The reported Level 3 metrics therefore reflect the complete inference path rather than an isolated
root-cause classifier. The precision-recall gap at Level 3 (0.941 vs. 0.793 on encoders, 0.948 vs.
0.823 on decoders) is consistent with this hierarchical filtering. Instances misclassified at Level 2
cannot be recovered at Level 3, which lowers macro-recall, while the predictions DEFault++ does
commit to remain mostly correct, which keeps macro-precision high.

Summary of RQ1: Across the three diagnostic levels, DEFault++ detected transformer faults
with AUROC above 0.96 on both architectures, categorized faults with Macro-F1 of 0.850
(encoder) and 0.868 (decoder), and diagnosed root causes with Macro-F1 of 0.851 (encoder)
and 0.867 (decoder), with macro-precision above 0.94 at Level 3.
The strongest categories
were those with distinct component-level measurements (Residual, Positional, Masking). QKV
remained the hardest because most of its root causes activated overlapping feature groups.

5.5
Answering RQ2: Comparison with Existing Techniques

To answer RQ2, we compared DEFault++ with four prior DL fault-detection techniques: Auto-
Trainer (Zhang et al., 2021), DeepDiagnosis (Wardat et al., 2022), DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022), and
DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b). We restricted the comparison to Level 1 detection because the
baselines do not expose label spaces that match the DEFault++ transformer categories or root
causes. Comparing them at Level 2 or Level 3 would equate non-equivalent outputs.

Table 15: Fault-detection comparison between DEFault++ and baselines

Method
Type
AUROC (Enc)
M-F1 (Enc)
Acc. (Enc)
AUROC (Dec)
M-F1 (Dec)
Acc. (Dec)

DEFault++
Neural hierarchical
0.9660
0.8238
0.9455
0.9620
0.9088
0.9107
DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b)
Hierarchical RF
0.8610
0.5660
0.8120
0.9030
0.7020
0.8460
DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022)
Flat ensemble
0.8340
0.5140
0.7810
0.8810
0.6550
0.8190
DeepDiagnosis (Wardat et al., 2022)
Rule-based (8 rules)
—
0.3380
0.7240
—
0.4820
0.7710
AutoTrainer (Zhang et al., 2021)
Rule-based (5 rules)
—
0.2840
0.6970
—
0.4270
0.7440

Rule-based techniques produce binary decisions without probabilistic scores, so AUROC is not applicable (—).

DEFault++ outperformed all four baselines on both architectures (Table 15).
On encoders,
DEFault++ reached AUROC of 0.966 and Macro-F1 of 0.824. The strongest baseline at Level 1
was DEFault, which reached AUROC of 0.861 and Macro-F1 of 0.566. DeepFD reached 0.834 and
0.514. The two rule-based methods scored lowest. AutoTrainer reached Macro-F1 of 0.284 and
DeepDiagnosis reached 0.338. AUROC is not applicable to AutoTrainer or DeepDiagnosis because
both produce binary decisions without a probability score.
On decoders, DEFault++ reached
AUROC of 0.962 and Macro-F1 of 0.909. DEFault reached 0.903 and 0.702, DeepFD reached 0.881
and 0.655, AutoTrainer reached 0.427, and DeepDiagnosis reached 0.482.

The learned baselines outperformed the rule-based baselines at Level 1 because they observed
runtime behavior at the model level rather than checking fixed symptom thresholds. Their feature
spaces were designed for general DNN faults and did not represent attention distributions, QKV
alignment, cache behavior, or component-level propagation.
The rule-based baselines target
gradient explosion, vanishing gradients, dying ReLU, and oscillating loss. These symptoms did
not cover many silent transformer faults in our benchmark, which preserved normal loss curves
and finite numerical values while changing internal attention behavior.

We do not report Level 2 or Level 3 comparisons. AutoTrainer and DeepDiagnosis generate generic
symptom labels that do not map to any fault category in our taxonomy. DeepFD and DEFault use
DNN-level fault categories that were defined independently of transformer component boundaries.
A numeric comparison at those levels would equate non-equivalent labels.
We report baseline
coverage in Table 9 instead.

Summary of RQ2: On Level 1 fault detection, DEFault++ outperformed all four evalu-
ated baselines across AUROC, Macro-F1, and accuracy. The improvement over DEFault and
DeepFD indicates that DNN-level diagnostic features were insufficient for many transformer
faults in our benchmark. The lower scores of AutoTrainer and DeepDiagnosis indicate that
fixed training-symptom rules missed faults whose evidence appeared inside attention, projec-
tion, cache, or residual behavior.

5.6
Answering RQ3: Ablation

Ablation design.
We assess the contribution of each architectural component by systematically
removing it from DEFault++ and measuring the performance drop. We ablate two components:
message passing in the Fault Propagation Graph and the separation loss Lsep. The separation loss
applies only at Level 3. We define two variants for Levels 1 and 2 and four variants for Level 3 as
follows.

1. DEFault++. The complete model with message passing in the FPG and the separation
loss at Level 3.

2. −FPG. We remove message passing in the FPG while retaining Lsep at Level 3.
This
variant measures the contribution of propagation-informed feature interaction.

3. −Sep (Level 3 only). We remove the separation loss (β = 0, γ = 0) while retaining
FPG. This variant measures the contribution of within-category root-cause discrimination.

4. −FPG−Sep.
We remove both FPG and Lsep, retaining only the feature-group MLPs
with projection. This variant tests the hierarchical classifier alone.

To test whether the specific FPG topology matters beyond just having any graph structure, we
define two additional topology variants as follows.

1. Rewired. We keep the same number of nodes and edges as the FPG but randomly reassign
edge endpoints while preserving the degree distribution, following the degree-preserving
rewiring procedure of Maslov and Sneppen (Maslov & Sneppen, 2002).
This rewiring
preserves the overall graph density and local connectivity profile while breaking the
meaningful propagation links between transformer components.

2. Random. We replace the FPG with an Erdős–Rényi random graph (Erdős & Rényi, 1959)
with approximately the same edge density. This replacement removes both the meaningful
propagation links and the degree structure of the original FPG.

Level 1: Fault detection.
We find that removing message passing in the FPG modestly reduces
detection performance on both architectures (Table 16). Binary detection is a coarse task. A fault
that disrupts any transformer component shifts the overall feature distribution enough for the
binary classifier to separate faulty from clean configurations. At this level, the classifier only needs
to separate faulty from clean configurations. We observe that message passing adds cross-group
information that improves the binary boundary, but the group-level features alone already support
detection. We retain message passing at Level 1 because cross-component aggregation helps detect
faults with weak local deviations, and the ablation confirms that removing it hurts detection.

Table 16: Ablation study of Level 1 fault detection

Architecture
Variant
AUROC
Accuracy
F1
F1w
Precision
Recall

Encoder
DEFault++
0.966
0.946
0.824
0.948
0.801
0.852
−FPG
0.921
0.922
0.782
0.924
0.752
0.816

Decoder
DEFault++
0.962
0.911
0.909
0.910
0.912
0.906
−FPG
0.949
0.892
0.890
0.892
0.890
0.891

Level 2: Fault categorization.
We find that removing message passing in the FPG produces the
largest drop in the entire ablation (Table 17). Categorization requires the classifier to distinguish
among 11 fault categories on encoders and 12 on decoders, several of which affect overlapping
feature groups. A QKV fault propagates to attention scores and the residual stream. A Score
fault propagates to attention weights and onward to the residual stream, but through a narrower
path than a QKV fault, which simultaneously affects both scores and values. Without message
passing, we compute each group embedding independently, and the classifier can only infer cross-
group relationships from the flat projection. With message passing, we route fault evidence along
the FPG propagation edges before the projection step, producing representations that already
encode how the fault spreads across components. We attribute the large drop to this loss of cross-
group structure, because propagation patterns are the distinguishing evidence for categories with
overlapping features.

Table 17: Ablation study of Level 2 fault categorization

Architecture
Variant
Accuracy
F1
F1w
Precision
Recall

Encoder
DEFault++
0.852
0.850
0.853
0.866
0.840
−FPG
0.743
0.742
0.745
0.757
0.731

Decoder
DEFault++
0.884
0.868
0.885
0.879
0.865
−FPG
0.790
0.788
0.791
0.797
0.783

Table 18: Ablation study of Level 3 root cause diagnosis

Architecture
Variant
Accuracy
F1
F1w
Precision
Recall

Encoder
DEFault++
0.795
0.851
0.857
0.941
0.793
−FPG
0.778
0.812
0.819
0.933
0.776
−Sep
0.752
0.756
0.763
0.910
0.752
−FPG−Sep
0.702
0.701
0.711
0.883
0.690

Decoder
DEFault++
0.826
0.867
0.875
0.948
0.823
−FPG
0.810
0.833
0.840
0.940
0.809
−Sep
0.781
0.781
0.788
0.925
0.781
−FPG−Sep
0.735
0.734
0.742
0.896
0.721

We find that removing message passing in the FPG at Level 3 (while retaining the separation loss)
produces a smaller drop. Message passing aggregates propagation-related evidence across groups
before prototype comparison, but the root-cause discrimination problem centers on within-category
separation rather than cross-group structure. We observe that removing both components together
produces the largest overall drop, which confirms that message passing and the separation loss
contribute complementary information at Level 3.

Topology ablation.
The preceding ablation compares the full FPG with no message passing at
all. To test whether the specific FPG topology matters, we compare it with two alternative graph
structures: Rewired (same density, shuffled edges) and Random (Erdős–Rényi graph with matched
density). Table 19 reports Macro-F1 across all three levels. The results show a consistent ordering
at every level and on both architectures: DEFault++ > Rewired > Random > −FPG. The FPG
with the correct propagation structure outperforms both alternative topologies. Rewired edges
preserve the graph density and degree distribution but break the meaningful propagation links,
and the performance drops below the full FPG at every level. Random edges lose both the specific
links and the degree structure of the original FPG, and performance drops further. Removing
message passing entirely (−FPG) produces the lowest performance.

Table 19: Topology ablation results using Macro-F1 across graph variants

Level
Architecture
DEFault++
Rewired
Random
−FPG

L1
Encoder
0.824
0.790
0.786
0.782
Decoder
0.909
0.894
0.892
0.890

L2
Encoder
0.850
0.770
0.754
0.742
Decoder
0.868
0.807
0.796
0.788

L3
Encoder
0.851
0.820
0.816
0.812
Decoder
0.867
0.838
0.835
0.833

The topology effect is strongest at Level 2, where DEFault++ outperforms Rewired by 0.080
(encoder) and 0.061 (decoder) in Macro-F1. This is consistent with the earlier finding that fault
categorization depends most on cross-group propagation structure. At Level 1 and Level 3, the
topology differences are smaller because binary detection is a coarser task and root-cause diagnosis
depends more on within-category separation than on cross-group structure.

Summary of RQ3: Both FPG message passing and the separation loss contributed to DE-
Fault++ performance. Removing FPG message passing reduced Macro-F1 most at Level 2
(from 0.850 to 0.742 on encoders and from 0.868 to 0.788 on decoders), where cross-component
propagation patterns distinguish categories with overlapping symptoms. Removing the sepa-
ration loss reduced Level 3 Macro-F1 most (from 0.851 to 0.756 on encoders and from 0.867
to 0.781 on decoders), where the model must separate root causes within the same category.
The topology ablation showed that the specific FPG structure, not graph connectivity alone,
explains the categorization gain (DEFault++ vs. Rewired: +0.080 encoder, +0.061 decoder at
Level 2).

5.7
Answering RQ4: Explanation Faithfulness

To answer RQ4, we evaluated whether the feature groups identified by DEFault++ supported the
predicted root cause. We used the prototype-based explanation from Level 3. For each instance,
DEFault++ compares the predicted root-cause prototype with the nearest alternative prototype
and decomposes the distance gap by feature group (Equation (29)).

Figure 13: Prototype-label agreement during training

Prototype-label agreement during training.
DEFault++ trains with two complementary
objectives at Level 3. The cross-entropy heads classify root causes from logits, while the prototype-
matching loss (Equation (28)) brings each sample closer to the correct prototype and farther
from alternatives within the same fault category. We use the prototype classifier for explanation
because the distance to a prototype decomposes group by group (Equation (29)), so each feature
group receives its own contribution score. Cross-entropy logits produce a single prediction vector
and do not offer this per-group breakdown.

matching objectives produced consistent predictions despite optimizing different loss surfaces. Only
the prototype classifier is used at inference.

Figure 14: Group ablation analysis for the FPG-based explanation

Group-ablation check.
We tested the explanation through group ablation. For each sample, we
identified the two groups with the largest importance scores (Equation (30)). The importance scores
are normalized to sum to one, and the distribution is typically concentrated on a few groups. In our
experiment, the top two groups captured a substantial share of the total score. We zeroed out these
two groups and compared the drop in the prototype margin (the gap between the predicted and
the nearest alternative prototype) with the drop obtained by zeroing two randomly chosen groups.
Removing the most important groups reduced the gap more than removing random groups across all
evaluated categories on both architectures (Figure 14). The most important groups therefore carried
the diagnostic information that separated the predicted root cause from the nearest alternative.

This result is a model-consistency check, not causal attribution. The benchmark does not provide
independent feature-group ground truth. The ablation supports internal faithfulness of the expla-
nation to the prototype decision, but it does not establish that the highlighted groups capture the
true causal mechanism of the original fault. The real-world evaluation in Section 6 provides an
additional check for selected cases. For each reproduced bug, we compare the feature groups high-
lighted by DEFault++ with the components changed by the source bug fix. This checks whether
the diagnostic trace is consistent with the code change, but it does not prove that the highlighted
components are the true cause of the fault.

Summary of RQ4: The FPG-based explanations are internally faithful to the prototype-based
root-cause decision under the evaluated ablation. Removing the most important feature groups
reduced the prototype margin more than removing random groups. This evidence supports
internal faithfulness, but it does not establish external causal attribution because independent
feature-group ground truth is unavailable.

6
Real-world Fault Evaluation

faulty version with the fixed version using the same feature extraction technique used in the ex-
perimental evaluation. DEFault++ detected 8 of the 11 faults, identified the correct fault category
for 8, and identified the root cause for 4 (see Table 20). We report each result at the same three
diagnostic levels used in the main evaluation. Fault detection (FD) checks whether DEFault++
marks the faulty version as faulty. Fault categorization (FC) checks whether it assigns the fault to
the correct transformer category. Root-cause diagnosis (RC) checks whether the predicted cause
matches the cause confirmed by the bug fix of the source issue. The evidence column reports the
feature group or feature that best reflects the faulty behavior.

Table 20: Real-world evaluation of DEFault++ on 11 transformer faults

Source
Fault category
DEFault++ result DEFault++ evidence
Diagnostic relation/scope

FD FC
RC

jax#23349
Masking
✓
✓
✓
Attention: padding atten-
tion mass
Attention feature group

pytorch#103082
Masking
✓
✓
✓
Attention:
future atten-
tion mass
Attention feature group

transformers#19045Positional
✓
✓
✗
Positional: positional sen-
sitivity
Forward sequential propagation (M1)

transformers#17886Positional
✓
✓
✗
Attention: inter-head co-
sine similarity
Forward sequential propagation (M1)

ai-edge-torch#6
QKV
✓
✓
✓
Score: pre-softmax score
Simultaneous propagation (M2)
nsa-pytorch#20
KV Cache
✓
✓
✗
KV Cache:
cache-related
behavior
Generation-time cache update path

transformers#37574KV Cache
✗
✗
✗
–
Generation-time cache behavior

transformers#36096Score
Crash*
–
Runtime failure before feature extrac-
tion
pytorch#116333
Kernel
✗
✗
✗
–
Backend stride validation
transformers#35896Variant
✓
✓
✗
Attention:
attention en-
tropy
Cross-layer propagation (M4)

diffusers#11903
QKV
✓
✓
✓
Optimization:
projection
update ratio
QKV projection/update path

Summary: FD - 8/11; FC - 8/11 categories; RC - 4/11 root causes.

FD = fault detection; FC = fault categorization; RC = root-cause diagnosis. Crash* indicates an explicit runtime failure before
feature extraction.

We observed two masking faults in which the faulty versions assigned attention to tokens that
should have been masked. In jax#23349, attention flowed to padding tokens; in pytorch#103082,
attention flowed to future tokens. DEFault++ captured these faults through padding attention
mass and future attention mass, respectively, and both values returned to zero after the fixes. We
also observed the QKV fault in diffusers#11903 through a near-zero QKV update ratio.
In
that issue, LoRA updated stale projection modules while the forward pass used the fused QKV
projection, hence the updated parameters did not affect the model output.

Similarly, in transformers#35896, sliding-window attention was applied to the wrong layers. This
changed the attention distribution at those layers through a cross-layer dependency (M4), which
DEFault++ captured through per-layer attention entropy. Across these four cases, DEFault++
identified the faulty component through a feature group connected to it in the FPG. This suggests
that the FPG-based explanation can help interpret real-world faults when the fault affects connected
feature groups.

The KV-cache fault exposes a limitation of DEFault++. In nsa-pytorch#20, DEFault++ cor-
rectly predicted the faulty status and the fault category (i.e., KV Cache). However, it incorrectly
predicted the root cause as cache invalidation, while the root cause is update synchronization (i.e.,
from ground truth labels of source issue). The cache update path was incorrect. Thus, the current
token’s key-value vectors were not synchronized with the attention and prediction computation.

DEFault++
could
not
diagnose
three
real-world
faults
across
all
three
levels.
In
transformers#37574, DEFault++ missed the fault as the faulty behavior appeared during au-
toregressive generation, where cached key-value states from earlier decoding steps interact with
the current token.
DEFault++ captures cache-related behavior during fine-tuning, but it does
not trace each cached decoding step during generation, which may miss abnormal behavior that
appears only at generation time.

In pytorch#116333, the fault came from backend stride validation rather than transformer-layer
behavior.
DEFault++ traces model-level fine-tuning dynamics.
It does not capture low-level
kernel-dispatch constraints. Detecting this fault would require system-level information beyond the
model trace used by DEFault++. Finally, in transformers#36096, the faulty flex_attention
implementation returned an attention tensor with an invalid rank. DEFault++ could not extract
diagnostic features since the run failed before producing a valid model trace. We therefore treat
this case as not applicable to DEFault++, rather than as a diagnostic failure.

(a) Hierarchical diagnostic output

Fault Detection
Faulty
(confidence: 0.98)

Normal training loss, abnormal projection-update behavior

Fault Categorization
QKV
(confidence: 0.91)

Deviations in QKV alignment, projection update, attention entropy

Root Cause Diagnosis
Stale-parameter
(confidence: 0.88)

Near-zero update ratio for q_proj/v_proj, fused path active

(b) Feature-group importance (wg)

QKV alignment
45%

73% in QKV alignment
and optimization

Optimization
28%

Attention
12%

Score
7%

Other
8%

Figure 15: DEFault++ diagnosis and feature-group importance for the stale QKV fusion fault in Listing 2.1

We use diffusers#11903 as a representative example of a silent QKV fault, which was also
used in the motivating example (see Section 2).
In this case, training completed normally,
but LoRA updated projection parameters that were no longer used by the forward pass.
The
faulty implementation fused the query, key, and value projections into to_qkv, while the original
projection modules remained accessible to LoRA. Figure 15 shows DEFault++’s three-level
diagnosis and the feature-group importance scores for this fault.

Level 1: Fault detection. DEFault++ classified the case as faulty, even though we found that the
training loss curve decreased normally. The strongest signal came from the optimization feature
group, where the update ratios for the stale projection modules were near zero relative to the
active fused path.

Level 2: Fault categorization. DEFault++ assigned the fault to the QKV category. We found that
QKV alignment feature group contributed the most to this decision, while the attention score
feature group provided secondary evidence.

Level 3: Root-cause diagnosis. DEFault++ identified the root cause as a stale projection update
path. The QKV alignment and Optimization feature groups together explain 73% of the normalized
feature importance (Figure 15).
This aligns with the repair decision because the fault affects
both the projection path and the parameter updates. The repair ensures that LoRA updates the
projection module used in the forward pass rather than the stale modules left after QKV fusion.

7
Developer Study

We evaluated whether DEFault++ diagnoses help developers choose correct repair actions for
transformer faults. Participants completed four debugging scenarios derived from reproduced real-
world GitHub issues. For each scenario, they selected a repair action either from baseline materials
alone or from the same materials plus the DEFault++ diagnosis.
We measured repair-action
accuracy, confidence, self-reported time, and perceived usefulness.

7.1
Study Design

We used a within-subjects, counterbalanced design with two conditions (Wohlin et al., 2012). In
the baseline condition, participants received a scenario description, observed behavior, and logs
with metrics. In the DEFault++ assisted condition, participants received the same materials plus
the DEFault++ diagnosis: Level 1 fault status, Level 2 fault category, Level 3 localized root cause,
and supporting feature-group evidence.
Each participant completed all four scenarios, two per
condition. We counterbalanced condition assignment across two survey forms. This scenario-based
evaluation follows prior developer studies of DL debugging techniques (Yuan et al., 2021; Manke
et al., 2025).

We derived the four scenarios from reproduced real-world GitHub issues (see Section 6), each
representing a distinct transformer fault category (Table 21). For one scenario (S3), the output of
DEFault++ was partially correct (see Table 23). We included this scenario to test whether the
partial diagnosis would still help developers select the correct repair action.

parameter change. The task measured whether participants could translate the available diagnostic
evidence into the correct repair direction.

Table 21: Developer-study scenarios and correct repair actions

Scenario
Source Issue
Fault Category Correct Repair Action

S1: Cached decoding visibility
pytorch #103082
Masking
Fix the causal mask for cached decoding so
the new token attends to the correct cached
key positions.
S2: Position-dependent scoring drift
transformers #19045 Positional
Recompute relative-position distances from
the true token positions during cached de-
coding.
S3: Incremental state update mismatch†
nsa-pytorch #20
KV Cache
Write the current token’s key-value vectors
into the cache before computing attention
and prediction scores.
S4: Local-attention layer assignment
transformers #35896 Variant
Fix
the
layer-selection
condition
so
local/sliding-window attention is applied
to the intended layers.

†In the assisted condition, DEFault++ correctly predicted the faulty status and KV Cache fault category, but incorrectly
predicted the root cause as cache invalidation rather than update synchronization.

The primary outcome was repair-action correctness, scored against the ground-truth fix from the
source issue. We also collected self-reported confidence on a 5-point scale and self-reported time
as a perceived-effort measure. After completing all scenarios, participants rated the clarity, useful-
ness, and practical value of the DEFault++ diagnosis on 5-point Likert scales and answered two
preference questions comparing the baseline and assisted conditions.

7.2
Participants

The Dalhousie University Research Ethics Board 4 reviewed and approved the developer study. El-
igibility required experience with transformer architectures in at least one of training, fine-tuning,
inference, debugging, or evaluation (Yuan et al., 2021; Manke et al., 2025).
We recruited 21
practitioners through graduate student mailing lists, academic networks, and direct outreach. Par-
ticipation was anonymous, voluntary, uncompensated, and hosted through Microsoft Forms.

Table 22: Developer study participant demographics (N = 21)

Characteristic
Value
N

ML/DL experience
Less than 1 year
1
1–2 years
6
3–5 years
10
More than 5 years
4

Prior transformer debugging Yes
15
No
6

Role (multi-select)
Research assistant
10
Graduate student
11
Industry practitioner
9

7.3
Results

We report descriptive statistics for each scenario and condition, following prior vignette-based
debugging studies such as UMLAUT (Yuan et al., 2021) and KUnit (Manke et al., 2025). As each
repair-action response is selected from four options and each participant sees only two scenarios
per condition, we treat the per-condition difference as an effect-size estimate rather than as the
basis for a hypothesis test.

Table 23: Repair accuracy and confidence by scenario and condition

Scenario
Condition
N
Correct
Accuracy
Confidence

S1 (Masking)
Baseline
12
8/12
66.7%
3.75
S1 (Masking)
Assisted
9
9/9
100.0%
4.11

S2 (Positional)
Baseline
9
4/9
44.4%
2.78
S2 (Positional)
Assisted
12
10/12
83.3%
3.75

S3 (KV Cache)
Baseline
12
7/12
58.3%
3.50
S3 (KV Cache)
Assisted
9
8/9
88.9%
4.11

S4 (Variant)
Baseline
9
5/9
55.6%
3.33
S4 (Variant)
Assisted
12
8/12
66.7%
4.08

Total
Baseline
42
24/42
57.1%
3.38
Total
Assisted
42
35/42
83.3%
4.00

Repair accuracy. Across the four scenarios, participants selected the correct repair action in 24
of 42 baseline responses (57.1%) and 35 of 42 DEFault++ assisted responses (83.3%), which is
an increase of 26.2% (see Table 23). The largest improvement occurred for the positional fault,
where baseline accuracy was lowest.
The smallest improvement occurred for the variant fault,
where the scenario already provided a clearer symptom-to-repair path. Under the assisted condi-
tion with DEFault++, no participant selected the unrelated hyperparameter option (see Figure 16).

Confidence. Participants also reported higher confidence under the assisted condition (M = 4.00,
SD = 0.83) than under the baseline condition (M = 3.38, SD = 1.08). Confidence remained higher
for correct responses than incorrect responses in both conditions, suggesting that DEFault++
increased confidence without eliminating the distinction between correct and incorrect repair
choices.

Participant feedback.
Participants rated the diagnostic output positively.
Twenty participants
(95%) agreed or strongly agreed that the output from DEFault++ was easy to understand
(M = 4.14, SD = 0.48), and 19 (90%) agreed or strongly agreed that it helped them decide what
repair to try first (M = 4.29, SD = 0.96). The same proportion reported that they would use a tool
like DEFault++ in practice (M = 4.10, SD = 0.89). 15 participants (71%) preferred the assisted
condition for debugging decision support.

Within-subjects comparison.
At the participant level, seven participants improved under the
assisted condition, 14 showed no change, and none declined. Thus, no participant performed worse
with DEFault++ assistance than without it.

(a) Repair accuracy by scenario and condition

(b) Likert agreement ratings

Figure 16: Developer study results

7.4
Discussion

The results suggest that DEFault++ is most useful when symptoms alone do not clearly indicate
the repair. The largest improvement happened for the positional fault (S2), where participants had
the weakest baseline performance. The smallest improvement occurred for the variant fault (S4),
where the repair direction was clearer from the scenario description. This pattern supports the
intended role of DEFault++ since it is designed to help developers translate internal fault evidence
into a repair direction when the observable behavior is ambiguous.

The incorrect baseline responses were mostly related but wrong repair choices, rather than un-
related hyperparameter changes. This suggests that participants engaged with the scenarios but
lacked enough diagnostic information to distinguish between relevant transformer components. The
assisted condition provided that missing diagnostic information.

Moreover, the perception ratings reinforce the repair-accuracy result. Most participants found the
DEFault++ output understandable and useful for deciding what repair to try first. This result is
consistent with related developer studies where UMLAUT helped participants find and fix more
faults (Yuan et al., 2021), and KUnit participants reported that mocks were useful for independent
component testing (Manke et al., 2025).

8
Limitations and Future Directions

The Fault Propagation Graph (FPG) assumes that faults always propagate along the deterministic
edges derived from the forward and backward pass.
In practice, successive matrix multiplica-
tions, normalization layers, and nonlinear activations can reduce or eliminate a fault’s effect before
it reaches a downstream component. The current FPG does not model this reduction. Future
work can run a fault-injection study to test whether downstream feature groups change as the
FPG predicts. The FPG also assumes a standard transformer block structure and does not model
architecture-specific parameter-tying shortcuts, such as the tied input-embedding and output-head
weights in GPT-2-style decoders (see Table 6). Architectures that differ from the standard trans-
former block layout may introduce propagation paths that the current graph does not represent.
Future work can extend the graph with such architecture-specific edges and with relation-typed
message passing that distinguishes the three mechanism classes.

Our benchmark uses single-fault configurations, with one fault injected per training run.
This
design lets us connect the observed behavior to the injected fault, which is necessary for assigning
the Level 2 category and the Level 3 root-cause label. It is also consistent with prior mutation-
testing studies for deep learning, including DeepCrime and DeepMutation++.

This restriction differs from DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b), which considers compound faults in
DNN programs by training a separate binary classifier for each fault category. That design can
detect more than one fault category in the same run. We do not use the same strategy here be-
cause transformer fault categories can affect the same internal components. For example, a QKV
fault can affect the Score and Residual groups, and a Score fault can affect Attention weights.
As Section 4.2 shows, these dependencies make it difficult for independent per-category classifiers
to separate co-occurring faults reliably. Extending DEFault++ to compound faults would require
multi-label diagnosis with explicit co-occurrence modeling, which is outside the scope of this work.
The benchmark also covers seven models and nine tasks and it does not include larger-scale archi-
tectures (e.g., mixture-of-experts models, multimodal models with cross-attention). Extending the
evaluation to these architectures remains future work.

9
Threats to Validity

Threats to internal validity (Wohlin et al., 2012) relate to experimental errors. The main threat
is information leakage among configurations sharing the same model–task pair. We reduce this
threat through nested grouped cross-validation that keeps all instances from the same model–task
pair in the same outer fold, fits all preprocessing and hyperparameter selection only on the
inner-training fold, and applies the same outer-fold assignments across all compared methods.
A second threat is the joint training objective. Shared encoder means that changes in one loss
can affect the representation available to the others.
In particular, the separation loss targets
root-cause discrimination and may guide the shared representation in ways that do not benefit
Level 1 or Level 2. To reduce this threat, we apply the separation loss only to faulty samples within
their ground-truth fault category (Section 4.5), which restricts its influence to within-category
structure rather than the global representation. We also test the per-level impact through the
ablation in RQ3.

Threats to construct validity (Smith, 2005) relate to whether the benchmark and the diagnostic
outputs reflect the intended diagnosis problem. The benchmark is produced by mutation operators
rather than by naturally occurring faults (Jahan et al., 2026; Humbatova et al., 2021). We reduce
this threat by deriving each operator from a real transformer fault root cause: the attention-internal
categories come from the 555-fault attention taxonomy (Jahan et al., 2026), and the non-attention
categories come from prior DNN fault taxonomies (Humbatova et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2019)
that catalog DL faults from open-source projects.
Class imbalance across categories and root
causes is another construct-validity threat, which we address through Macro-F1 reporting and
inverse-frequency class weighting (Buda et al., 2018).

The mutation-killing decision adds further construct threats specific to DEForm.
Our test is
a one-sided sign-flip permutation test with n = 5 matched seeds, in contrast to DeepCrime’s
generalized linear model with n = 20 (Humbatova et al., 2021). Five seeds are the smallest design
that admits an exact one-sided test at α = 0.05, so the attainable p-value floor is 1/25 ≈0.031,
and subtle faults whose effect size falls below this floor may be missed. To reduce the impact of
this floor, we retain surviving mutants as Level 1 negative examples rather than discarding them,
so the model still sees cases whose measured effect does not pass the killing test. The operator
set is also not exhaustive: new attention variants, caching schemes, and kernel implementations
continue to appear, and DEForm’s 45 operators cover root causes that were reported at the time
the benchmark was built rather than every possible failure mode (Humbatova et al., 2021; Islam
et al., 2019).

To reduce the impact of an evolving fault landscape, we link mutation operators to the attention
fault taxonomy (Jahan et al., 2026) and to prior DNN fault taxonomies (Humbatova et al., 2020;
Islam et al., 2019) so that new operators can be added as those taxonomies are extended, without
changing the diagnostic technique. Severity and layer indices are sampled according to a uniform
distribution, which prevents overrepresentation of any specific magnitude or depth.

Figure 17: Mutation scores per (model, task) pair under isKilled at α = 0.05. Cell values give the fraction
of injected configurations killed by the task-performance criterion

severity uniformly across {low, medium, high} rather than concentrating on aggressive faults,
although trivial configurations cannot be eliminated without per-operator parameter tuning at
scale.

Finally, the FPG-based explanation is derived from the same model that produces the diagnosis,
so the importance scores may reflect model behavior rather than the underlying causal mecha-
nism. We test the explanation through the group-ablation check in RQ4 and the trace-to-code
consistency checks in the real-world evaluation (Section 6). These tests check consistency within
our evaluation, but they do not provide independent causal evidence.
We therefore frame the
explanation as evidence supporting the prediction rather than as causal attribution.

The developer study (Section 7) carries two further external-validity threats. First, the sample is
modest (N = 21); we use a within-subjects, counterbalanced design where each participant completes
tasks under both baseline and DEFault++-assisted conditions, which reduces between-participant
variation, although participants do not solve the same scenario in both conditions. Second, par-
ticipants evaluated vignette-based scenarios rather than using DEFault++ in a live debugging
environment. We base each vignette in reproduced real-world issues, use the same fault categories
and diagnostic outputs as the main evaluation, and isolate the diagnostic signal from tool-usability
confounds. This choice improves experimental control but may not fully capture the time pressure,
context switching, code navigation, and iterative hypothesis testing of real debugging work, so we
treat self-reported time as a perceived-effort measure rather than as an objective task-duration
measure.

10
Related Work

Fault Taxonomies. Empirical studies of Deep Learning (DL) programs have classified faults by
root cause (Humbatova et al., 2020; Islam et al., 2019), covering training, hyperparameter, and
layer-configuration faults across feed-forward, convolutional, and recurrent architectures. These
taxonomies were proposed before the wide adoption of attention-based architectures and do not
include transformer-specific fault patterns. The attention fault taxonomy (Jahan et al., 2025a;
2026) addresses this gap by classifying 555 attention-related faults into seven categories and 25
root-cause mechanisms. DEFault++ combines these attention categories with five non-attention
categories drawn from the prior DNN taxonomies above (see Section 3.1).

Table 24: Comparison of the DEFault-bench mutation process with existing mutation techniques

Dimension
DeepMut.++
DeepCrime
DeepFD
PyTorchFI
DEFault-bench

Fault granularity
Layer/param
Source (AST)
Program
Bit/tensor
Transformer unit
Mechanism count
17a
24 impl.b
5 types
Bit-flip
12 categories
Architecture coverage FFNN/CNN/RNN Generic DNN Generic DNN CNN (infer.) Encoder + decoder
Attention mechanisms
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
Behavior change
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
Decision basis
Accuracy
GLM + d
Accuracy
SDC rate
Accuracy + sign-flip
Noise control
✗
✓c
✗
✗
✓
Scale (reported)
Varies
1,760
52 programs
107+ inj.
3,739
Labeled traces
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓

a8 source-level + 9 model-level mechanisms (Hu et al., 2019). b35 defined, 24 implemented from real faults (Humbatova et al.,
2021). cDeepCrime uses GLM with n=20 retrainings and Cohen’s d for statistical killing. ✓= supported; ✗= not supported.

Mutation Testing for Deep Learning.
Mutation testing is a well-established technique in
software engineering for assessing test quality, typically by introducing small, controlled changes to
a program and checking whether existing tests detect them (see Table 24). Several researchers have
adapted this idea for deep learning. DeepMutation (Ma et al., 2018a) and DeepMutation++ (Hu
et al., 2019) introduced mutation operators that modify training code, model structure, or learned
parameters, and use mutation scores to quantify test adequacy for neural models.

et al., 2023). DeepCrime (Humbatova et al., 2021) adopts a similar strategy, performing multiple
retrainings and applying statistical tests with effect-size thresholds to determine whether a mutation
has a significant impact.

A smaller number of studies use injected faults explicitly for fault diagnosis. DeepFD (Cao et al.,
2022) injects common fault types into deep learning programs and trains classifiers on runtime
features to identify fault categories. Subsequent work extends this idea to larger corpora of faulty
programs through data-driven localization (Wardat et al., 2023). These approaches remain limited
for transformer architectures for two reasons. First, they target generic model and training faults
(e.g., loss misconfiguration, incorrect layer numbers) rather than faults within the transformer
architecture.
Second, these works rely on high-level model performance (e.g., accuracy drop)
and standard runtime features that do not capture the internal structure of attention-based models.

Debugging Techniques for Deep Learning Programs. Recent work has framed DL fault diag-
nosis as a classification problem using runtime information collected during training. DeepFD (Cao
et al., 2022) extracts features from loss curves, gradients, weight statistics, and activation patterns,
and trains a classifier to identify common training faults such as an incorrect loss function, learning
rate, or activation function. DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b) extends this idea into a hierarchical
classifier that first detects whether a program is faulty and then assigns the fault to one of seven
training or model fault categories. DEFault++ inherits this hierarchical structure, but changes the
diagnostic target and the evidence source. It replaces architecture-agnostic DNN features with mea-
surements taken from transformer components and adds root-cause diagnosis within each predicted
category. As a result, DEFault++ can distinguish faults in QKV projection, masking, attention
scoring, residual connections, and other transformer-specific components, whereas DeepFD and
DEFault report generic DNN fault categories.

Table 25: Comparison of fault diagnosis techniques for DL/DNN programs

Technique
Target
FD
FC
RC
Attn-Aware
Explanation

AutoTrainer (Zhang et al., 2021)
DNN
✓
Partial (5)
✗
✗
Rule-based
UMLAUT (Yuan et al., 2021)
DNN
✓
Partial
✗
✗
Rule-based
DeepDiagnosis (Wardat et al., 2022)
DNN
✓
✓(8)
✗
✗
Decision tree
DeepLocalize (Wardat et al., 2021)
DNN
NaN/Inf only
✗
✗
✗
Numerical trace
DeepFD (Cao et al., 2022)
DNN
✓
✓(5)
✗
✗
Feature attribution
DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b)
DNN
✓
✓(7)
✗
✗
SHAP
ATTNChecker (Liang et al., 2025)
Transformer
NaN/Inf only
✗
✗
✓
✗
AtPatch (Weng et al., 2026)
Transformer
Map outlier
✗
✗
✓
✗
FT-Transformer (Dai et al., 2025)
Transformer
Soft errors
✗
✗
✓
✗

DEFault++ (Ours)
Transformer
✓
✓(12)
✓(45)†
✓
FPG+prototype

FD = fault detection; FC = fault categorization; RC = root-cause diagnosis.
†DEFault++ covers 45 root causes in total. Of these, 40 apply to encoder models and all 45 apply to decoder models because
KV Cache faults are decoder-specific.

finer granularity: MODE (Ma et al., 2018b) and DeepFault (Eniser et al., 2019) localize faults at the
neuron level, Apricot (Zhang & Chan, 2019) repairs faulty DNNs by adjusting model weights, and
DeepSeer (Wang et al., 2023) supports interactive RNN debugging through learned state abstrac-
tion. None of these techniques observe the runtime behavior of attention components or distinguish
among transformer-specific fault categories. As a result, transformer faults that preserve normal
loss curves, valid tensor shapes, and finite numerical values fall outside their detection scope, which
is the gap DEFault++ targets.

A third body of work uses static analysis to find DL faults before or independent of training.
Structural and numerical analyzers (NeuraLint (Nikanjam et al., 2021), DEBAR (Zhang et al.,
2020), NerdBug (Jafarinejad et al., 2021)) check meta-model graphs, tensor abstractions, and
API usage.
Symbolic and backend-comparison analyzers (DeepCheck (Gopinath et al., 2019),
CRADLE (Pham et al., 2019)) test trained networks or compare backends to locate library-level
bugs, and BugLab (Allamanis et al., 2021) self-supervises bug detection on general source code.
FL4Deep (Morovati et al., 2024) occupies a middle position: it combines static and dynamic infor-
mation through a knowledge graph and ranks candidate root causes over that graph.

These techniques answer a different debugging question and therefore are not direct baselines
for DEFault++.
Static and library-level analyzers find faults that show up in program text,
symbolic constraints, API usage, tensor abstractions, or backend inconsistencies.
DEFault++
targets faults that leave the transformer program structurally valid and numerically stable but
change how attention components behave during training. A transformer can pass type checks,
shape checks, and backend consistency checks while still producing abnormal attention behavior.
The graph representations in NeuraLint and FL4Deep also serve a different purpose from the
FPG: NeuraLint encodes program structure for pre-training checks, and FL4Deep encodes a
static-plus-dynamic knowledge graph for ranking. In contrast, the FPG encodes how a fault in
one transformer component reaches other components during training. We therefore treat these
techniques as complementary and evaluate DEFault++ against dynamic techniques that use the
same training-time input.

Transformer-Specific Fault Analysis.
The closest existing techniques to DEFault++ ana-
lyze transformer-internal behavior, but each targets a narrower failure mode than the taxonomy
in Figure 3. ATTNChecker (Liang et al., 2025) flags NaN or Inf values during attention com-
putation, AtPatch (Weng et al., 2026) localizes attention-map anomalies at the patch level, FT-
Transformer (Dai et al., 2025) addresses hardware soft-error tolerance for vision transformers, and
Bug Attention Probe (Stein et al., 2025) applies attention probing for code understanding. None of
them produces a fault category or a root cause across the transformer block. DEFault++ instead
covers the full taxonomy and predicts faults at three levels: detection, category, and root cause.

A separate line of transformer research uses input perturbation to study robustness and behav-
ioral invariance (Jones et al., 2020; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Clark et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019),
including DeepTest (Tian et al., 2018) for autonomous-driving DNNs. These techniques target be-
havioral failures exposed by perturbed inputs, whereas DEFault++ targets implementation faults
that persist during normal training without input perturbation.

Recent LLM-assisted debuggers such as SoapFL (Qin et al., 2025), LLM4FL (Rafi et al., 2024),
ChatDBG (Levin et al., 2025), and BugReAct (Islam et al., 2026) reason over source code,
execution logs, or bug reports to localize bugs in general software. They are complementary to
DEFault++:
they read software artifacts after a failure is reported, while DEFault++ reads

training-time traces from transformer components and predicts a transformer-specific category
and root cause.

Explainability for Fault Diagnosis. Diagnostic output is more actionable when it exposes the
evidence behind the prediction.
Existing explanation methods fall into two families.
Post-hoc
methods compute explanations after a model has produced a decision. SHAP (Lundberg & Lee,
2017), DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020), and Anchors (Ribeiro et al., 2018) return feature attributions,
counterfactual examples, or rule-based explanations from a trained classifier. DEFault (Jahan et al.,
2025b) used this style of explanation in its hierarchical diagnosis. Inherently interpretable meth-
ods build the explanation into the model itself. Prototype networks (Snell et al., 2017) represent
each class as a learned prototype and explain a prediction through similarity to that prototype.
Concept-bottleneck models (Koh et al., 2020) route predictions through human-readable interme-
diate concepts. DEFault++ follows the inherently interpretable line. Its diagnosis identifies which
runtime feature groups distinguish the predicted root cause from the nearest alternative, and thus
the explanation comes from the same model that produced the diagnosis rather than from a separate
analysis applied afterward.

11
Conclusion

We presented DEFault++, a transformer-specific hierarchical diagnostic technique for detecting,
categorizing, and localizing faults in transformer models.
DEFault++ extends the hierarchical
diagnosis idea introduced for FFNNs, CNNs, and RNNs by DEFault (Jahan et al., 2025b) to
transformer architectures, and it reports which feature groups provide the main evidence for each
diagnosis. DEFault++ organizes the diagnosis around a Fault Propagation Graph that encodes
how faults propagate between transformer components. To support both training and evaluation,
we constructed DEFault-bench, a benchmark of 3,739 labeled instances produced by DEForm, our
transformer-specific mutation technique.
On DEFault-bench, DEFault++ achieves an AUROC
above 0.96 for detection, a Macro-F1 above 0.85 for categorization, and a hierarchical root-cause
Macro-F1 above 0.85 on both encoder and decoder architectures. In a developer study with 21 prac-
titioners across four debugging scenarios, the repair-action accuracy was 83.3% with DEFault++
assistance and 57.1% without it, and 90% of participants indicated that they would use such a tool in
practice. Future work includes extending DEFault++ to compound faults, larger-scale architectures
(e.g., mixture-of-experts and multimodal models), and live debugging environments. The replica-
tion package, including DEFault-bench, the DEForm operators, and the trained models, is publicly
available at

Acknowledgements

The construction of DEFault-bench required approximately 18,600 GPU-hours, executed on
NVIDIA A100 (40 GB) and NVIDIA H100 (80 GB) GPUs provided through the Digital Research
Alliance of Canada (formerly Compute Canada). We gratefully acknowledge the Digital Research
Alliance of Canada for the computational resources that made this work possible.

References

Miltiadis Allamanis, Henry Jackson-Flux, and Marc Brockschmidt. Self-supervised bug detection
and repair. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 27865–27876,
2021.

Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

Houssem Ben Braiek and Foutse Khomh. Testing feedforward neural networks training programs.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 32(4):1–61, 2023.

Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace
He, Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Samuel Pittman, Jonathan Tow, Ben Wang, and
Samuel Weinbach. Gpt-neo: Large scale autoregressive language modeling with mesh-tensorflow.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00006, 2021.

Andrew P. Bradley. The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning
algorithms. Pattern Recognition, 30(7):1145–1159, 1997. doi: 10.1016/S0031-3203(96)00142-2.

Mateusz Buda, Atsuto Maki, and Maciej A. Mazurowski. A systematic study of the class imbalance
problem in convolutional neural networks. Neural networks, 106:249–259, 2018.

Jialun Cao, Meiziniu Li, Xiao Chen, Ming Wen, Yongqiang Tian, Bo Wu, and Shing-Chi Cheung.
Deepfd: Automated fault diagnosis and localization for deep learning programs. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 573–585, 2022.

Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine Learning, 28(1):41–75, 1997.

Gautam Chakrabarti, Vinod Grover, Bastiaan Aarts, Xiangyun Kong, Manjunath Kudlur, Yuan
Lin, Jaydeep Marathe, Mike Murphy, and Jian-Zhong Wang. Cuda: Compiling and optimizing
for a gpu platform. Procedia Computer Science, 9:1910–1919, 2012.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavar-
ian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plap-
pert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol,
Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William
Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter
Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba.
Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. What does bert look
at? an analysis of bert’s attention. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP, pp.
276–286, 2019.

Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré.
Flashattention: Fast and
memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 35, pp. 16344–16359, 2022.

Alana de Santana Correia and Esther Luna Colombini.
Attention, please!
a survey of neural
attention models in deep learning. Artificial Intelligence Review, 55(8):6037–6124, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of
the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language
technologies, pp. 4171–4186, 2019.

Yihe Dong, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Andreas Loukas. Attention is not all you need: Pure
attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2793–2803, 2021.

Hasan Ferit Eniser, Simos Gerasimou, and Alper Sen. Deepfault: Fault localization for deep neural
networks. In International Conference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering, pp.
171–189, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.

Pál Erdős and Alfréd Rényi. On random graphs I. Publicationes Mathematicae Debrecen, 6:290–297,
1959.

Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan M Swetter, Helen M Blau, and
Sebastian Thrun. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks.
nature, 542(7639):115–118, 2017.

Kawin Ethayarajh.
How contextual are contextualized word representations?
Comparing the
geometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 55–65, 2019.

Michael G Findley, Kyosuke Kikuta, and Michael Denly.
External validity.
Annual Review of
Political Science, 24(1):365–393, 2021.

Ben Bariach, Laura Weidinger, Tu Vu, Alek Andreev, Antoine He, Kevin Hui, Sheleem Kashem,
Amar Subramanya, Sissie Hsiao, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Adam Sadovsky, Quoc
Le, Trevor Strohman, Yonghui Wu, Slav Petrov, Jeffrey Dean, and Oriol Vinyals. Gemini: a
family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

Aaron Gokaslan and Vanya Cohen. OpenWebText corpus, 2019.
/OpenWebTextCorpus.

Phillip Good. Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses. Springer, 3rd edition,
2005.

Divya Gopinath, Mengshi Zhang, Kaiyuan Wang, Ismet Burak Kadron, Corina Pasareanu, and
Sarfraz Khurshid.
Symbolic execution for importance analysis and adversarial generation in
neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE), pp. 313–322. IEEE, 2019.

Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 1321–1330. PMLR, 2017.

Qiang Hu, Lei Ma, Xiaofei Xie, Bing Yu, Yang Liu, and Jianjun Zhao. Deepmutation++: A muta-
tion testing framework for deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pp. 1158–1161. IEEE, 2019.

Nargiz Humbatova, Gunel Jahangirova, Gabriele Bavota, Vincenzo Riccio, Andrea Stocco, and
Paolo Tonella. Taxonomy of real faults in deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 1110–1121, 2020.

Nargiz Humbatova, Gunel Jahangirova, and Paolo Tonella. Deepcrime: mutation testing of deep
learning systems based on real faults. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT International Sym-
posium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), pp. 67–78, 2021.

Ashraful Islam, Benjamin Lundell, Harpreet Sawhney, Sudipta N Sinha, Peter Morales, and
Richard J Radke. Self-supervised learning with local contrastive loss for detection and semantic
segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision, pp. 5624–5633, 2023.

Md Johirul Islam, Giang Nguyen, Rangeet Pan, and Hridesh Rajan. A comprehensive study on deep
learning bug characteristics. In Proceedings of the ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), pp. 510–
520, 2019.

Niful Islam, Ragib Shahriar Ayon, Deepak George Thomas, Shibbir Ahmed, and Mohammad War-
dat. When agents fail: A comprehensive study of bugs in llm agents with automated labeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.15232, 2026.

Foad Jafarinejad, Krishna Narasimhan, and Mira Mezini. Nerdbug: automated bug detection in
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Workshop on AI and Software
Testing/Analysis, pp. 13–16, 2021.

Sigma Jahan, Saurabh Singh Rajput, Tushar Sharma, and Mohammad Masudur Rahman. Taxon-
omy of faults in attention-based neural networks, 2025a. URL
.04925.

Sigma Jahan, Mehil B Shah, Parvez Mahbub, and Mohammad Masudur Rahman.
Improved
Detection and Diagnosis of Faults in Deep Neural Networks Using Hierarchical and Explain-
able Classification .
In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE), pp. 2944–2956, 2025b.
doi:
10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00224.
URL

Sigma Jahan, Saurabh Rajput, Tushar Sharma, and Mohammad Masudur Rahman. Why attention
fails: A taxonomy of faults in attention-based neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2026.

Erik Jones, Robin Jain, and Percy Liang. Automatically finding bugs in a classifier: A systematic
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02907, 2020.

Hans Kamp and Barbara Partee. Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57(2):129–191,
1995.

Prannay Khosla, Yonglong Tian, Huiwen Wang, Ce Liu, Phillip Isola, Dilip Krishnan, Yao Tian,
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Alan Yuille, Quoc V. Le, Cordelia Schmid, and Trevor Darrell. Super-
vised contrastive learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
works. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and
Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
5338–5348. PMLR, 2020.

Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural net-
work representations revisited. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), pp. 3519–3529. PMLR, 2019.

Kyla H. Levin, Nicolas van Kempen, Emery D. Berger, and Stephen N. Freund. ChatDBG: Aug-
menting debugging with large language models.
In Proceedings of the ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE). ACM, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3729355.

Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
3538–3545, 2018.

Shuai Lin, Chen Liu, Pan Zhou, Zi-Yuan Hu, Shuojia Wang, Ruihui Zhao, Yefeng Zheng, Liang
Lin, Eric Xing, and Xiaodan Liang. Prototypical graph contrastive learning. IEEE transactions
on neural networks and learning systems, 35(2):2747–2758, 2022.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Joshi Mandar, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee.
A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 30, 2017.

Lei Ma, Fuyuan Zhang, Jiyuan Sun, Minhui Xue, Bo Li, Felix Juefei-Xu, Chao Xie, Li Li, Yang Liu,
Jianjun Zhao, and Yadong Wang. Deepmutation: Mutation testing of deep learning systems. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE),
pp. 100–111. IEEE, 2018a.

Shiqing Ma, Yingqi Liu, Wen-Chuan Lee, Xiangyu Zhang, and Ananth Grama. Mode: automated
neural network model debugging via state differential analysis and input selection. In Proceedings
of the ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), pp. 175–186, 2018b.

Abdulrahman Mahmoud, Neeraj Aggarwal, Alex Nobbe, Jose Rodrigo Sanchez Vicarte, Sarita V.
Adve, Christopher W. Fletcher, Iuri Frosio, and Siva Kumar Sastry Hari. Pytorchfi: A runtime
perturbation tool for dnns. In 50th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks Workshops, DSN Workshops 2020, Valencia, Spain, June 29 - July 2,
2020, pp. 25–31. IEEE, 2020. doi: 10.1109/DSN-W50199.2020.00014. URL
10.1109/DSN-W50199.2020.00014.

Ruchira Manke, Mohammad Wardat, Foutse Khomh, and Hridesh Rajan.
Mock deep testing:
Toward separate development of data and models for deep learning.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’25, pp. 2970–2982.
IEEE Press, 2025.
ISBN 9798331505691.
doi:
10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00220.
URL

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):313–330, 1993.

Sergei Maslov and Kim Sneppen. Specificity and stability in topology of protein networks. Science,
296(5569):910–913, 2002.

Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, and OpenAI Dota Team. An empirical model of
large-batch training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06162, 2018.

Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016. Introduces the WikiText datasets.

Evan Miller. Attention is off by one.
.html, 2023. Blog post.

Mohammad Mehdi Morovati, Amin Nikanjam, and Foutse Khomh.
Fault localization in deep
learning-based software: A system-level approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08172, 2024.

Marius Mosbach, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Dietrich Klakow. On the stability of fine-tuning
bert: Misconceptions, explanations, and strong baselines. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2021. URL

Ramaravind K. Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. DiCE: Diverse counterfactual expla-
nations for machine learning classifiers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Ac-
countability, and Transparency (FAT*), pp. 607–617. ACM, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372850.

Gireen Naidu, Tranos Zuva, and Elias Mmbongeni Sibanda. A review of evaluation metrics in
machine learning algorithms. In Computer science on-line conference, pp. 15–25. Springer, 2023.

Amin Nikanjam, Houssem Ben Braiek, Mohammad Mehdi Morovati, and Foutse Khomh. Auto-
matic fault detection for deep learning programs using graph transformations. ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology, 31(1):1–27, 2021.

NVIDIA. Nvidia deep learning profiler (dlprof) user guide, 2021.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Denis Paperno, German Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazaridou, Quan Ngoc Pham, Raffaella Bernardi,
Sandro Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Roberto Fernández.
The LAMBADA
dataset: Word prediction requiring broad discourse context. In Proceedings of ACL 2016, 2016.

Hung Viet Pham, Thibaud Lutellier, Weizhen Qi, and Lin Tan. Cradle: cross-backend validation to
detect and localize bugs in deep learning libraries. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 1027–1038. IEEE, 2019.

Yihao Qin, Shangwen Wang, Yiling Lou, Jinhao Dong, Kaixin Wang, Xiaoling Li, and Xiaoguang
Mao. SoapFL: A standard operating procedure for LLM-based method-level fault localization.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 51(4):1173–1187, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2025.3
543187.

Ketai Qiu, Niccolò Puccinelli, Matteo Ciniselli, and Luca Di Grazia. From today’s code to tomor-
row’s symphony: The ai transformation of developer’s routine by 2030. ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, 34(5), 2025. ISSN 1049-331X. doi: 10.1145/3709353.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.

Md Nakhla Rafi, Dong Jae Kim, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Shaowei Wang. A multi-agent approach to
fault localization via graph-based retrieval and reflexion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13642, 2024.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic
explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

Lucas Roquet, Fernando Fernandes dos Santos, Paolo Rech, Marcello Traiola, Olivier Sentieys,
and Angeliki Kritikakou. Cross-layer reliability evaluation and efficient hardening of large vision
transformers models. In Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, pp.
1–6, 2024.

Olivier Roy and Martin Vetterli. The effective rank: A measure of effective dimensionality. In 2007
15th European signal processing conference, pp. 606–610. IEEE, 2007.

Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.

Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version
of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.

Gregory T Smith. On construct validity: issues of method and measurement. Psychological assess-
ment, 17(4):396, 2005.

Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 30, 2017.

Adam Stein, Arthur Wayne, Aaditya Naik, Mayur Naik, and Eric Wong. Where’s the bug? atten-
tion probing for scalable fault localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13966, 2025.

Florian Tambon, Foutse Khomh, and Giuliano Antoniol. A probabilistic framework for mutation
testing in deep neural networks. Information and Software Technology, 155:107129, 2023. doi:
10.1016/j.infsof.2022.107129. URL
pii/S0950584922002385. Also available as arXiv:2208.06018 [cs.SE].

Yuchi Tian, Kexin Pei, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. DeepTest: Automated testing of deep-
neural-network-driven autonomous cars. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 303–314, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2018. ACM. doi: 10.1145/31
80155.3180220.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.

Elena Voita, Jean-Baptiste Talbot, Rico Sennrich Yandex Research Ivan Titov University of Ed-
inburgh Moiseev, and Rico Sennrich. Analyzing multi-head self-attention: Specialized heads do
the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 5797–5808, 2019.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In
Proceedings of ICLR 2019, 2019.

Feng Wang and Huaping Liu. Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2495–2504, 2021.

Mohammad Wardat, Wei Le, and Hridesh Rajan. Deeplocalize: Fault localization for deep neural
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), pp. 251–262. IEEE, 2021.

Mohammad Wardat, Breno Dantas Cruz, Wei Le, and Hridesh Rajan. Deepdiagnosis: automatically
diagnosing faults and recommending actionable fixes in deep learning programs. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 561–572, 2022.

Mohammad Wardat, Breno Dantas Cruz, Wei Le, and Hridesh Rajan. An effective data-driven
approach for localizing deep learning faults. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08947, 2023.

Kun Wei, Zhe Xu, and Cheng Deng.
Compress to one point: Neural collapse for pre-trained
model-based class-incremental learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, volume 39, pp. 21465–21473, 2025.

Shihao Weng, Yang Feng, Jincheng Li, Yining Yin, Xiaofei Xie, and Jia Liu. Atpatch: Debugging
transformers via hot-fixing over-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21695, 2026.

Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Höst, Magnus C. Ohlsson, Björn Regnell, and Anders Wesslén.
Experimentation in Software Engineering. Springer, 2012.

Tom Nuno Wolf, Fabian Bongratz, Anne-Marie Rickmann, Sebastian Pölsterl, and Christian
Wachinger.
Keep the faith: Faithful explanations in convolutional neural networks for case-
based reasoning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 38, pp.
5921–5929, 2024.

Dangwei Wu, Beijun Shen, Yuting Chen, He Jiang, and Lei Qiao. Tensfa: detecting and repairing
tensor shape faults in deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), pp. 11–21. IEEE, 2021.

Ruibin Xiong, Yunchang Yang, Di He, Kai Zheng, Shuxin Zheng, Chen Xing, Huishuai Zhang,
Yanyan Lan, Liwei Wang, and Tie-Yan Liu. On layer normalization in the transformer architec-
ture. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2020. URL
s/v119/xiong20b.html.

Ming Yan, Junjie Chen, Xiangyu Zhang, Lin Tan, Gan Wang, and Zan Wang. Exposing numerical
bugs in deep learning via gradient back-propagation. In Proceedings of the ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE), pp. 627–638, 2021.

Zhuang Yuan, Antoine Tixier, Aashish Rastogi, Hung Bui, Ben Ramos, Raymond Toth, and Anup
Rao. Umlaut: Debugging deep learning models using dynamic analysis. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), pp. 1080–1091,
2021.

Shuangfei Zhai, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Etai Littwin, Dan Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, Yuren
Zhang, and Joshua M. Susskind. Stabilizing transformer training by preventing attention entropy
collapse. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 40770–
40803, 2023b.

Hao Zhang and W. K. Chan.
Apricot: A weight-adaptation approach to fixing deep learning
models. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE), pp. 376–387, San Diego, CA, USA, 2019. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ASE.2019.000
43.

Xiaoyu Zhang, Juan Zhai, Shiqing Ma, and Chao Shen. Autotrainer: An automatic dnn training
problem detection and repair system. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 359–371. IEEE, 2021.

Yuhao Zhang, Luyao Ren, Liqian Chen, Yingfei Xiong, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Tao Xie. Detecting
numerical bugs in neural network architectures.
In Proceedings of the ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE), pp. 826–837, 2020.

A
DEFault++ Dataset Construction Hyperparameters

Table 26 lists the full fine-tuning hyperparameters used to construct DEFault-bench (Section 3).
Encoder and decoder configurations are presented side by side.

Table 26: Encoder and decoder fine-tuning hyperparameters used to construct DEFault-bench

Parameter
Encoder
Decoder

Epochs
5
5
Batch size
16
8
Optimizer
AdamW
AdamW
Learning rate
2 × 10−5
5 × 10−5

Weight decay
0.01
0.01
ϵ
10−8
10−8

Max gradient norm
1.0
1.0
Warmup ratio
0.06
0.06
Schedule
Linear with warmup
Linear with warmup
Precision
fp16 (mixed)
fp16 (mixed)
Max sequence length
—
512
Seeds
{42, 123, 456, 789, 101112}
{42, 123, 456, 789, 101112}

B
DEFault++ Parameters

Table 27: Hyperparameter configuration for the DEFault++ neural hierarchical model

Architecture
Optimization
Loss / Temperature / Evaluation

Embedding dimension
64
Learning rate
0.001
α (detection)
1.0
Group hidden dimension
32
Weight decay
1 × 10−4
β (category)
0.5
GNN message-passing layers
3
Batch size
256
γ (prototype)
0.3
Dropout
0.1
Max epochs
150
λ (root cause)
1.0
Early stopping patience
20
βsibling (contrast.)
0.5
Prototype temperature τ
0.1
Sibling contrastive τs
0.1
Cross-validation folds
5
Fold strategy
GroupKFold