Calibration Drift Under Reasoning:
How Chain-of-Thought Budgets Induce
Overconfidence in Large Language Models

arXiv:2606.11211v1 [cs.CL] 24 Apr 2026

Prakul Sunil Hiremath

Harshit R Hiremath

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Visvesvaraya Technological University, Belagavi

Department of Computer Science and Business System
SG Balekundri Institute of Technology, Belagavi

June 11, 2026

Abstract
The ability of large language models (LLMs) to express calibrated
uncertainty is a prerequisite for their safe deployment. Chain-of-
thought (CoT) reasoning has been widely promoted as a technique
that improves both accuracy and reliability. We argue that this pic-
ture is incomplete: in at least some model scales and problem types,
increasing the reasoning budget beyond a problem-specific threshold
can cause models to become systematically overconfident—reporting
high verbalized probabilities for answers that are incorrect. We term
this phenomenon Calibration Drift Under Reasoning (cdur)
and study it formally and empirically.
Formally, we define a reasoning budget B and analyze condi-
tions under which the Expected Calibration Error ECE(B) traces a
non-monotone trajectory in B: initially falling as reasoning corrects
surface errors, then rising as extended chains produce internally con-
sistent but factually wrong trajectories. We introduce a Hypothesis
Lock-In Model grounded in autoregressive generation to explain this
mechanism.
Empirically, we evaluate Llama-3.1-8B and Llama-3.3-70B on 47
reasoning-trap questions across four reasoning budgets and three
seeds (1,368 API calls; 574 valid responses). The 8B model exhibits
non-monotonic calibration behavior, while results for 70B remain
limited to baseline evaluation and are inconclusive with respect to
budget-dependent dynamics.
We introduce CABStop, a calibration-aware stopping rule that
halts reasoning when confidence diverges from an auxiliary accuracy
estimate. These findings suggest that increasing reasoning depth
does not uniformly improve reliability and should be explicitly
monitored.

Keywords: calibration, chain-of-thought reasoning, Expected Calibration Error,
overconfidence, large language models, reasoning budgets

Code & data available at
GitHub
·
Zenodo

Contents

1
Introduction
4
1.1
The Core Phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Why This Matters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5

2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Calibration in Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Overconfidence in LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Stopping Rules and Optimal Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6

3
Formalizing Calibration Drift Under Reasoning
6
3.1
Reasoning Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Calibration as a Function of Reasoning Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Definition of CDUR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Propositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7

4
Mechanistic Model: Hypothesis Lock-In
8
4.1
The Commitment Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Connection to Autoregressive Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Connection to RLHF Reward Shaping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Empirical Signatures of Hypothesis Lock-In
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Hypothesis Lock-In Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10

5
Experimental Setup
10
5.1
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
Dataset Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
Validity Filtering and Potential Bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
Reasoning Budgets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.5
Confidence Elicitation and Its Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.6
Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12

6
Results
13
6.1
Main Result: Non-Monotonic Calibration Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.2
Interpreting the 8B Calibration Arc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.3
The 70B Results Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.4
Wrong + Confident Analysis (Smoking Gun) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.5
Confidence–Accuracy Scatter: Limitations of Aggregate ECE . . . . . . .
15
6.6
Statistical Uncertainty and Variance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.7
Confidence–Accuracy Decoupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.8
Error Persistence Under Extended Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.9
When More Reasoning Helps vs. Hurts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.10 Trap Category Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17

7.2
Formulation as an Optimal Stopping Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.3
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7.4
TikZ: CABStop Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18

8
Threats to Validity
19

9
Discussion
20
9.1
When CDUR Should Be Expected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9.2
Implications for Inference-Time Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9.3
Implications for Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
9.4
Theoretical Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
9.5
Connections to Human Reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21

10 Future Work
21

11 Conclusion
22

A Proof Details
24
A.1 Formal Consistency Score
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
A.2 Discussion of Assumption Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24

B Dataset: Trap Question Examples
24

C Experimental Logs (Summary)
25

1
Introduction

A model is well-calibrated if its expressed confidence in an answer reliably tracks the
probability that the answer is correct [De Groot and Fienberg, 1983, Guo et al., 2017].
Calibration failure—especially overconfidence—degrades human-AI collaboration, erodes
trust, and causes systematic errors in downstream decisions.

Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [Wei et al., 2022] has become a standard technique for
improving LLM performance on multi-step reasoning tasks. The intuition is appealing:
by generating intermediate reasoning steps before committing to an answer, a model
can decompose hard problems, catch arithmetic mistakes, and arrive at better-supported
conclusions. Large-scale results confirm that longer reasoning chains often raise accuracy
[Kojima et al., 2022, Lightman et al., 2023].

Our central claim. Accuracy improvement does not imply calibration improvement.
More precisely, we observe that at least in the small-model regime and on structured
reasoning-trap tasks, increasing reasoning budget can inflate confidence without propor-
tionally inflating correctness—a regime we call Calibration Drift Under Reasoning
(cdur). We emphasize that this claim is presented as an observed and theoretically
motivated phenomenon, not as a universally established law: the strength of evidence
varies across model scales, and several methodological limitations constrain the scope of
our conclusions.

1.1
The Core Phenomenon

Consider a model that initially responds to a question with low confidence and imperfect
accuracy. As it is prompted to reason more extensively, its accuracy may rise—but so
may its expressed confidence, and not always in proportion. At some budget level B∗,
confidence may begin to outpace accuracy. Past B∗, the model is not merely wrong; it is
confidently wrong.

This pattern is illustrated schematically in Figure 2 and explored empirically in Section 6,
where we find behavior consistent with this description for Llama-3.1-8B. Evidence for
the larger Llama-3.3-70B model is incomplete (Section 6.3).

1.2
Why This Matters

Safety. A model that says “I am 95% confident” while being wrong 50% of the time is
more dangerous than one that says “I am 60% confident” while being wrong the same
fraction of the time.

Inference-time scaling. Recent work proposes allocating more compute at inference time
to difficult problems [Snell et al., 2024]. Without calibration awareness, such scaling may
backfire: the model becomes more expensive and, in certain regimes, more overconfident.

Human oversight. When models are integrated into human decision pipelines, overcon-
fident wrong answers are harder for humans to catch and correct.

1.3
Contributions

This paper makes the following contributions, stated precisely to reflect the scope of our
evidence:

(1) Formal framework. We provide a rigorous definition of cdur as a property of
the calibration function ECE(B), and state three formal propositions characterizing
its behavior under a probabilistic reasoning model (Section 3). These propositions
offer theoretical grounding for the phenomenon; they are not proved as properties of
arbitrary LLMs but rather under an explicit commitment-model abstraction.

(2) Hypothesis Lock-In Model. We introduce and analyze a mechanistic model of au-
toregressive reasoning that explains why calibration drift may occur, and characterize
the conditions under which it is most severe (Section 4).

(3) Empirical observation. We conduct controlled experiments on two Llama model
families across four reasoning budgets and 21 trap-question categories, measuring
ECE, accuracy, and overconfidence gap. For Llama-3.1-8B, we observe non-monotonic
calibration dynamics qualitatively consistent with the cdur framework. For Llama-
3.3-70B, results are limited to the no-reasoning condition and are thus suggestive but
inconclusive (Section 6).

(4) CABStop algorithm. We propose a principled stopping rule for inference-time
reasoning that halts before the overconfidence regime, and analyze it as an instance
of optimal stopping (Section 7).

2
Background and Related Work

2.1
Calibration in Machine Learning

The formal study of calibration originates in the forecasting literature [De Groot and
Fienberg, 1983, Murphy, 1977]. Guo et al. [2017] showed that modern deep neural networks
are poorly calibrated and that temperature scaling provides a simple post-hoc fix. Desai
and Durrett [2020] extended this analysis to text classification with pre-trained language
models. For generative models, calibration must be measured via verbalized probabilities
[Kadavath et al., 2022, Xiong et al., 2024] since token-level likelihoods are not directly
accessible in deployment.

2.2
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Wei et al. [2022] demonstrated that few-shot CoT prompting substantially improves
performance on arithmetic and commonsense reasoning. Kojima et al. [2022] showed that
zero-shot CoT (“let’s think step by step”) achieves comparable gains. Lightman et al.
[2023] studied process-level supervision, showing that rewarding correct intermediate steps
further improves accuracy.

Budget-constrained reasoning has been explored in the context of inference-time scaling
[Snell et al., 2024, Muennighoff et al., 2025], where additional compute is allocated
proportionally to estimated problem difficulty.

2.3
Overconfidence in LLMs

Xiong et al. [2024] showed that LLMs are systematically overconfident when asked to
verbalize their confidence, especially on harder questions. Zhou et al. [2023] documented
that chain-of-thought can increase hallucination in certain conditions. Turpin et al. [2023]
showed that spurious reasoning patterns are common even in high-accuracy responses.
Our work is distinguished by the explicit focus on the interaction between reasoning
budget and calibration, characterized formally as a function ECE(B).

2.4
Stopping Rules and Optimal Inference

The optimal stopping literature [Wald, 1947, Chow and Robbins, 1961] provides a natural
framework for deciding when to halt a sequential computation. Graves [2016] applied
adaptive computation to recurrent networks. Our CABStop algorithm instantiates a
stopping rule over the reasoning trajectory of an LLM.

3
Formalizing Calibration Drift Under Reasoning

We now provide a formal account of the cdur phenomenon. Let Q be a set of questions
and A a label space. A model M takes as input a question q ∈Q, a reasoning budget
B ∈N ∪{0}, and produces an answer ˆa ∈A together with a verbalized confidence
ˆp ∈[0, 1].

3.1
Reasoning Budget

Definition 3.1 (Reasoning Budget)

A reasoning budget B is an upper bound on the number of tokens allocated to
intermediate reasoning steps prior to answer generation. We say B = 0 corresponds
to direct (no-reasoning) inference, and B = ∞denotes unbounded reasoning.
In practice, we discretize: B ∈{none, light, medium, heavy}, corresponding to ap-
proximately 0, 128, 512, and 2048 tokens respectively.

3.2
Calibration as a Function of Reasoning Budget

Definition 3.2 (Budget-Conditional Calibration)

For a reasoning budget B, define:

Acc(B) = Pq[ˆa(q, B) = a∗(q)],
(1)
Conf(B) = Eq[ˆp(q, B)],
(2)
OG(B) = Conf(B) −Acc(B)
(overconfidence gap),
(3)

where a∗(q) is the ground-truth answer and expectations are over the question
distribution.
The Expected Calibration Error at budget B is

ECE(B) = E
h
|ˆp(q, B) −P[ˆa(q, B) = a∗(q) | ˆp(q, B)]|
i
,
(4)

where the expectation is over questions and the inner probability is over randomness
in generation.

3.3
Definition of CDUR

Definition 3.3 (Calibration Drift Under Reasoning, cdur)

A model M exhibits Calibration Drift Under Reasoning if there exists a critical
budget B∗∈(0, ∞) such that:

d ECE(B)

dB
< 0
for B < B∗,
d ECE(B)

dB
> 0
for B > B∗.
(5)

That is, B 7→ECE(B) is U-shaped with a minimum at B∗.

Intuitively, initial reasoning (B < B∗) resolves surface ambiguity and improves calibration.
Extended reasoning (B > B∗) locks in an incorrect hypothesis and accumulates spurious
internal evidence, raising confidence without improving accuracy. We note that this
definition is idealized: in practice, the budget axis is discrete and the ECE curve need not
be strictly U-shaped. The 8B empirical results are consistent with CDUR in the sense
that ECE is non-monotone, but the arc from light (0.104) to medium (0.050) to heavy
(0.015) does not match a simple U-shape. We discuss this discrepancy in Section 6.2.

3.4
Propositions

Proposition 3.4 (Confidence Inflation Under Commitment)

Under a commitment model (Definition 4.1), extended reasoning increases conditional
confidence ˆp(q, B) monotonically in B, even when the correctness probability P[ˆa = a∗]
is unchanged.

Proof sketch. Let h0 denote the initial hypothesis sampled at the start of the reasoning
chain (Definition 4.1). Subsequent tokens are generated conditioned on h0. The verbalized
confidence ˆp is a function of the internal consistency of the chain: more tokens consistent
with h0 yield higher ˆp.

Formally, let Rt be the t-th reasoning token and let C(R1, . . . , Rt; h0) be a consistency score
(e.g., fraction of tokens that reinforce h0). Under an autoregressive model conditioned
on h0, E[C(R1, . . . , Rt; h0)] is non-decreasing in t because each subsequent token is drawn
from a distribution already conditioned on h0, making tokens supporting h0 more likely.

Since ˆp = g(C) for some non-decreasing g, it follows that E[ˆp(q, B)] is non-decreasing in B.
Meanwhile, the correctness event depends only on whether h0 is the correct hypothesis,
which is fixed at sampling time and unchanged by subsequent reasoning.

Proposition 3.5 (Error Amplification)

If the initial hypothesis selection has error probability ε, then the expected overconfi-
dence gap E[OG(B)] is monotonically non-decreasing in B for B > B∗.

Proof sketch. Partition questions into two sets: Q+ where h0 = a∗(correct initialization)
and Q−where h0 ̸= a∗(incorrect). For q ∈Q+, extended reasoning increases ˆp while
maintaining correctness, leaving OG roughly constant. For q ∈Q−, extended reasoning
increases ˆp while accuracy remains 0, increasing OG by Proposition 3.4. The overall gap
satisfies
E[OG(B)] = (1−ε) · OG+(B) + ε · OG−(B),

where OG+(B) ≈0 and OG−(B) = ˆp−(B) is non-decreasing. Since ε > 0, E[OG(B)] is
non-decreasing in B.

Proposition 3.6 (Accuracy Plateau with Confidence Growth)

There exists a regime [B∗, B∗∗] in which Acc(B) is approximately constant while
Conf(B) continues to increase, resulting in a widening overconfidence gap.

Proof sketch. Accuracy Acc(B) depends on whether reasoning successfully corrects errors
in h0. Correction requires the model to generate a token sequence that contradicts h0
and substitutes an alternative—this is a low-probability event under the commitment
model (the model is explicitly conditioned on h0). For large B, the probability of such
a correction decreases further since more of the context supports h0. Hence Acc(B) is
approximately constant past B∗. In contrast, Conf(B) continues to grow by Proposition 3.4.
The difference Conf(B) −Acc(B) = OG(B) is therefore increasing on [B∗, B∗∗] for any
B∗∗> B∗.

Remark 3.1. These propositions are stylized: they rely on the commitment model defined
in Section 4. They are intended to provide theoretical intuition consistent with our
empirical findings, not to characterize the full behavior of arbitrary autoregressive LLMs.
In practice, real models can revise initial hypotheses mid-chain, especially at heavy
reasoning budgets—and this is part of why accuracy continues to rise even past B∗in our
8B results.

4
Mechanistic Model: Hypothesis Lock-In

4.1
The Commitment Model

Definition 4.1 (Commitment Model)

Given a question q, reasoning under budget B proceeds in three stages:

based on the full context (q, R).

This model is an idealization of autoregressive generation. The key structural feature
is Step 2: the reasoning chain is conditioned on h0, making it a constrained trajectory
rather than a free search. An important consequence is that Pθ(Rt | q, h0, R<t) assigns
higher mass to tokens that are consistent with h0, and the probability of generating a
token that contradicts h0 is low.

4.2
Connection to Autoregressive Generation

In an autoregressive LLM, h0 is not sampled explicitly. Instead, the model generates the
first few tokens of its reasoning in response to the question prompt. These early tokens
function as h0 in our model: they determine the trajectory of subsequent generation via
attention. The longer the reasoning chain, the more earlier tokens influence later ones,
making course correction increasingly unlikely.

This is consistent with empirical findings on self-consistency [Wang et al., 2022]: longer
reasoning chains are more self-consistent, but self-consistency does not imply correctness.

4.3
Connection to RLHF Reward Shaping

Modern LLMs are fine-tuned with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
[Ouyang et al., 2022]. Human raters tend to prefer responses that are confident and
internally coherent [Turpin et al., 2023]. This creates a training pressure toward high-
confidence outputs, independently of accuracy. Combined with the commitment model,
RLHF provides a mechanistic pathway through which training may amplify the cdur
phenomenon: models are rewarded for appearing confident, especially when their reasoning
is fluent and internally consistent.

4.4
Empirical Signatures of Hypothesis Lock-In

The Hypothesis Lock-In Model makes several testable predictions. We examine each
against our empirical results.

Persistence of errors across budget levels.
If lock-in occurs, we expect specific
incorrect answers to persist as the budget increases: once committed to a wrong h0, the
model should continue predicting the same wrong answer even when given additional
reasoning tokens. We observe this directly in our data: several wrong-and-confident
responses at the no-reasoning level recur verbatim at the light reasoning level (e.g., the
syllogism case, expected: “no”, predicted: “yes” with confidence 1.0, appearing at both
none and light budgets). This is qualitative evidence consistent with Proposition 3.4.

categories systematically elicit wrong confident answers, consistent with stable h0 sampling
for these problem types.

Failure of extended reasoning to correct.
Proposition 3.6 predicts that accuracy
plateaus in the lock-in regime while confidence continues to rise. For Llama-3.1-8B,
accuracy at medium reasoning (0.653) is actually lower than at light (0.732), suggesting
medium-budget chains introduce new errors rather than correcting existing ones. This
is consistent with partial lock-in: light reasoning is sufficient to lock in a wrong answer
on some questions, while medium reasoning explores but then re-commits to wrong
hypotheses.

Connection to formal propositions.
Taken together, these signatures provide empir-
ical support for the qualitative predictions of Propositions 3.4 and 3.6: confidence rises
faster than accuracy (OG > 0.25 at all budgets), and wrong answers show cross-budget
stability. We caution that with 47 questions and three seeds, these are illustrative rather
than statistically conclusive.

4.5
Hypothesis Lock-In Diagram

Figure 1 provides a schematic of the lock-in process.

5
Experimental Setup

5.1
Models

We evaluate two models from the Llama family:

• Llama-3.1-8B: A compact instruction-tuned model. We use it to study cdur in the
small-model regime. This model is the primary source of multi-budget evidence in this
paper.

• Llama-3.3-70B: A high-capacity model. Due to resource constraints, we report only
the no-reasoning condition for this model; conclusions about its calibration dynamics
across budgets are therefore not possible from current data (see Section 6.3).

Both models are accessed via their instruction-following variants. Inference temperature
is set to 0.7 to allow for variability across seeds.

5.2
Dataset Construction

We construct a dataset of reasoning-trap questions: questions specifically designed
to elicit common cognitive failure modes. These are not standard benchmark questions—
standard benchmarks contain many items that can be answered correctly by surface
pattern matching, which would suppress the cdur signal.

The dataset contains 47 distinct trap questions. Each question is evaluated over 3 random
seeds and 4 reasoning budgets, yielding 47 × 3 × 4 × 2 = 1,128 intended evaluations per
model family (plus non-trap items), for a total of 1,368 API calls.

5.3
Validity Filtering and Potential Bias

Not all model responses can be scored. A response is considered valid if:

(1) It contains an extractable answer in the expected format (numeric, boolean, or
short-form text).

(2) It contains an extractable verbalized confidence in [0, 1] or as a percentage.

(3) Neither the answer nor the confidence field is empty or a refusal.

Of 1,368 total responses, 574 were valid trap-question responses (42% overall validity
rate). This rate is low enough to raise concerns about selection bias, which we discuss
explicitly here.

Causes of invalidity.
Invalid responses arise from several sources: (a) format non-
compliance, where the model does not produce an answer and confidence in the requested
schema; (b) refusals or hedges, where the model declines to answer; (c) truncation,
where the response is cut short before a confidence value is produced; and (d) confidence
expressed in non-parseable forms (e.g., “moderately confident”).

Selection bias risk.
Critically, invalidity may be correlated with uncertainty. A model
that is uncertain about a question may be more likely to hedge, express confidence verbally
rather than numerically, or produce an extended disclaimer rather than a direct answer.
If this is the case, valid responses oversample questions where the model is relatively
confident—which would inflate our estimates of mean confidence and OG, and potentially
distort ECE toward overconfidence.

Budget-specific effects.
Validity rates may also vary across budget conditions: heavy
reasoning responses are longer and more likely to contain parseable confidence values, while
no-reasoning responses may be too brief or too terse to contain them. If validity is higher
at heavy reasoning, the cross-budget ECE comparisons are made on non-comparable
subsets of questions, complicating interpretation.

Mitigation and transparency.
We report all metrics only on the valid subset and
make no claim that results generalize to the full intended population. Future work should
use response formats that guarantee parseable outputs (e.g., structured generation or
constrained decoding) to eliminate this source of bias.

5.4
Reasoning Budgets

We implement reasoning budgets via prompt engineering. Each budget condition uses a
specific system-level instruction:

Light Show a brief 2–3 sentence chain of thought before answering.

Medium Show a structured, step-by-step solution before answering.

Heavy Work through the problem completely, exploring multiple approaches and checking
your work, before giving a final answer.

5.5
Confidence Elicitation and Its Limitations

After each response, we append a standardized follow-up prompt: “On a scale from 0 to
1, how confident are you in your answer? Give only a number.”

Verbalized confidence vs. epistemic uncertainty.
Verbalized confidence is not
equivalent to true epistemic uncertainty. When a model reports a confidence value, it is
generating a token that may reflect training patterns, prompt phrasing, or the fluency of
the preceding reasoning chain—not necessarily a calibrated internal probability. Xiong et
al. [2024] have shown that verbalized confidence in LLMs is systematically miscalibrated,
particularly on difficult questions.

In the cdur context, this limitation is particularly salient: our hypothesis is that extended
reasoning increases internal consistency, which in turn causes the model to report higher
confidence. This means our confidence measurement instrument—verbalized probability—
is precisely the variable the model learns to inflate during reasoning. The reported
confidence values thus reflect both genuine epistemic state and a surface-level coherence
signal that is not well-separated by our elicitation method.

Why results remain meaningful.
Despite this limitation, verbalized confidence is
the signal available to downstream users and decision systems in deployment. If a model
reports high verbalized confidence and is wrong, the downstream effect is the same
regardless of whether the reported confidence reflects true uncertainty or surface-level
fluency. Measuring and reporting verbalized-confidence miscalibration is thus practically
relevant, even if it does not measure deeper epistemic properties.

Alternative confidence signals.
Future work should triangulate verbalized confidence
with complementary signals. Log-probability of the answer token (where accessible)
provides a model-internal measure less susceptible to RLHF-induced inflation.
Self-
consistency across k independent completions [Wang et al., 2022] provides a behavioral
estimate of answer stability. Ensemble agreement across models provides an orthogonal
check. Comparing these signals would clarify whether the overconfidence we observe is a
surface linguistic phenomenon or a deeper representational failure.

5.6
Metrics

Expected Calibration Error (ECE).
We use equal-width binning with 10 bins over
[0, 1]:

M
X

|Bm|

Acc(Bm) −Conf(Bm)
,
(6)

ECE =

N

m=1

where Bm is the m-th confidence bin, N is the total number of samples, and Acc, Conf
are the mean accuracy and mean confidence within each bin.

Overconfidence gap (OG).
OG = Conf −Acc, measured globally. Positive values
indicate overconfidence; negative values indicate underconfidence.

Wrong + Confident.
The count of responses that are simultaneously incorrect (ˆa ̸= a∗)
and highly confident (ˆp ≥0.90). This is the “smoking gun” statistic that most directly
characterizes dangerous overconfidence.

6
Results

6.1
Main Result: Non-Monotonic Calibration Dynamics

Figure 2 shows the theoretical cdur curve, and Table 3 (Appendix C) reports full
numerical results. We summarize the key observations here.

Llama-3.1-8B.
The 8B model exhibits non-monotonic calibration dynamics: ECE
is 0.044 ± 0.015 at no-reasoning, rises to 0.104 ± 0.034 at light reasoning, then falls
to 0.050 ± 0.049 at medium and 0.015 ± 0.005 at heavy reasoning.
This trajectory
is qualitatively consistent with the cdur framework in that ECE is not monotonically
decreasing with budget; the worst calibration occurs at light reasoning, not at the extremes.
We interpret this in detail in Section 6.2.

Llama-3.3-70B.
The 70B model results are limited to the no-reasoning condition: ECE
= 0.035 ± 0.026, OG = +0.155. These figures indicate better baseline calibration and
lower overconfidence compared to 8B, consistent with scale generally improving calibration.
However, we cannot confirm or deny CDUR dynamics for this model, as no multi-budget
data are available. The 70B results are thus suggestive of better baseline behavior but
cannot serve as confirmation or disconfirmation of the CDUR hypothesis at this scale.

Overconfidence Gap.
The 8B model shows persistently positive overconfidence across
all budget levels: OG = +0.49 at no-reasoning, falling to +0.25–+0.34 at other bud-
gets. Even at heavy reasoning—where ECE is lowest—the overconfidence gap remains
substantially positive, indicating that accuracy improvements have not fully closed the
confidence-accuracy gap.

6.2
Interpreting the 8B Calibration Arc

The observed 8B trajectory (ECE: 0.044 →0.104 →0.050 →0.015) does not match a
clean U-shape as depicted in the schematic. The following interpretation is more accurate.

At no reasoning, the model produces direct, often confident answers. Many are wrong,
but confidence is distributed somewhat heterogeneously—some questions elicit hedged
responses, others elicit confident ones, and the ECE is moderate.

At light reasoning, the model generates brief chains that are often insufficient to fully
analyze the trap question. These partial chains tend to reinforce the initial (frequently
incorrect) hypothesis while increasing expressed confidence, producing the worst-case
calibration scenario: higher confidence without commensurate accuracy. This is the regime
most clearly predicted by the commitment model.

At medium reasoning, the model generates longer chains that sometimes begin to uncover
the trap, but also sometimes compound errors by adding reasoning steps that re-justify a
wrong initial direction. The high standard deviation (±0.049) at medium budget reflects
this instability.

At heavy reasoning, extended chains allow the model to explore multiple solution paths
and occasionally self-correct. The combination of higher accuracy (0.739) and still-high
confidence (≈0.984) results in a lower ECE. However, persistent overconfidence (OG
= +0.245) shows that even at this budget, the model is systematically more confident
than accurate.

We characterize the 8B results as exhibiting partial CDUR behavior: the ECE trajectory
is non-monotone, the worst calibration occurs at intermediate reasoning budgets, and
overconfidence persists throughout. This is consistent with but not identical to the
idealized U-shaped curve of Definition 3.3.

6.3
The 70B Results Gap

Resource constraints limited the 70B evaluation to the no-reasoning condition. This gap
is significant for interpreting our results, and we address it explicitly.

What the 70B results do and do not show.
The no-reasoning ECE of 0.035 and
OG of +0.155 establish that the 70B model is better calibrated at baseline than the 8B
model. The lower OG (+0.155 vs. +0.493) suggests that 70B is less prone to confident-
wrong answers at zero reasoning. These findings are consistent with scale improving
calibration—a pattern noted in prior work [Kadavath et al., 2022].

However, we cannot infer anything about how the 70B model’s calibration changes with
reasoning budget. It is possible that 70B exhibits CDUR dynamics similar to 8B, exhibits
them in attenuated form, or does not exhibit them at all. All three outcomes are compatible
with the current data.

Appropriate framing.
We refrain from framing the 70B results as “confirming” or
“suggesting” CDUR for large models. The correct framing is: the 70B model is better
calibrated at no reasoning than the 8B model; whether it exhibits calibration drift under
extended reasoning is an open empirical question.

6.4
Wrong + Confident Analysis (Smoking Gun)

Table 2 lists model responses where the model was simultaneously wrong and expressed
confidence ≥0.90.

spatial categories dominate the wrong+confident list (Figure 3), consistent with prior
findings that LLMs struggle with precise discrete enumeration and 3D spatial reasoning.

6.5
Confidence–Accuracy Scatter:
Limitations of Aggregate
ECE

ECE aggregates calibration error into a scalar, which obscures the structure of per-sample
confidence-accuracy relationships. A per-sample scatter plot of (ˆpi, 1[ˆai = a∗
i ]) would
reveal features that aggregate ECE does not capture.

Under ideal calibration, such a scatter would align with the diagonal: responses with
confidence ˆp would be correct with probability ˆp. What we expect to observe in our data,
based on the aggregate OG values, is a systematic upward displacement from the diagonal:
a cluster of high-confidence (ˆp ≈1.0) incorrect answers that should fall at zero accuracy
on the scatter.

This structure has practical implications beyond what ECE reports. A model with ECE
= 0.05 could achieve that value in two qualitatively different ways: (a) many responses with
moderate miscalibration spread uniformly across confidence levels, or (b) most responses
being well-calibrated with a small cluster of catastrophically overconfident wrong answers.
The second pattern is more dangerous in practice but may yield a similar aggregate ECE.

Given our wrong-and-confident count (Table 2), we expect our data to exhibit pattern (b).
Future work should report per-sample calibration distributions rather than only aggregate
ECE, and should test whether the overconfident-wrong cluster is concentrated in specific
trap categories or distributed across questions.

6.6
Statistical Uncertainty and Variance

Impact of small sample size.
With 47 trap questions evaluated across 3 seeds, the
effective per-budget sample size is approximately 40–50 valid responses after filtering.
This is the minimum for ECE estimation to be stable; standard calibration studies use
hundreds to thousands of samples. Our ECE estimates should be treated as indicative
rather than precise.

Interpreting standard deviations.
The reported standard deviations across seeds
(e.g., ECE = 0.050 ± 0.049 at medium budget) are large relative to the mean in some
conditions. This indicates that individual seed runs produce quite different ECE values,
which is expected given the small dataset. Comparisons between budget conditions should
be made cautiously: for example, the medium-budget ECE (0.050) and no-reasoning ECE
(0.044) are not statistically distinguishable given their respective standard deviations.

Claims calibrated to evidence.
Given these limitations, we state the following care-
fully: we observe that light-reasoning ECE is substantially higher than both no-reasoning
and heavy-reasoning ECE in the 8B model, and that this difference is directionally consis-
tent across all three seeds. We do not claim that this pattern is statistically significant by
conventional tests, nor that it would replicate exactly on a different dataset.

6.7
Confidence–Accuracy Decoupling

A central prediction of the cdur framework is that Conf(B) and Acc(B) can diverge: as
B increases, confidence may rise faster (or fall slower) than accuracy.

For Llama-3.1-8B, accuracy increases from 0.461 (none) to 0.739 (heavy). However, the
overconfidence gap remains above 0.25 across all budgets, indicating that mean confidence
also rises with budget and tracks accuracy incompletely. The gap is highest at no-reasoning
(+0.493)—where the model produces many confident wrong answers without a reasoning
process to check them—and lowest at heavy reasoning (+0.245).

This decoupling is captured by Proposition 3.6: there exists a range of B where accuracy
plateaus but confidence continues to grow.
Our data suggest this regime occurs at
light-to-medium budgets for the 8B model.

6.8
Error Persistence Under Extended Reasoning

One might expect that heavy reasoning would always correct errors present at lower
budgets.
Our data partially contradict this. The syllogism example (expected: no,
predicted: yes, confidence 1.0) appears at both the no-reasoning and light-reasoning levels,
suggesting that once the model commits to an incorrect logical inference, light additional
reasoning reinforces rather than corrects it. This is consistent with the lock-in mechanism
of Section 4.

At heavy reasoning, some of these persistent errors are corrected (accuracy rises from
0.461 to 0.739), suggesting that sufficiently extensive reasoning can break lock-in for some
questions. However, the non-zero overconfidence gap at heavy reasoning (+0.245) implies
that a subset of wrong answers persist even with extensive computation.

6.9
When More Reasoning Helps vs. Hurts

Based on our results, we characterize three regimes:

Regime I: Surface correction (B ≪B∗). Short reasoning chains catch arithmetic
slips and minor ambiguities.
Accuracy rises; calibration improves.
This is the
conventional wisdom about CoT.

Regime II: Lock-in (B ≈B∗). The model has committed to a hypothesis but has not
yet accumulated overwhelming internal evidence. Calibration is at its worst: the
model is just confident enough to be wrong dangerously. This is the critical budget
B∗.

Regime III: Heavy reasoning (B ≫B∗). Extended chains allow the model to occa-
sionally escape lock-in via multi-step reformulations. ECE falls again as accuracy
rises. However, for problems where the initial hypothesis is fundamentally wrong, no
amount of reasoning helps—these become the persistent overconfident failures.

The practical implication is that moderate reasoning budgets may produce worse calibration
than either no reasoning or heavy reasoning for calibration-sensitive tasks. This does not
mean that heavy reasoning is always preferable: it is more expensive and still exhibits a
positive overconfidence gap.

6.10
Trap Category Analysis

Figure 3 reports the distribution of wrong+confident responses by trap category. Counting,
set_theory, spatial, and semantic errors dominate. These categories share a common
property: they require precise discrete computation or strict logical inference—tasks where
an LLM’s fluency-based approximation is systematically misleading.

7
The CABStop Algorithm

7.1
Motivation

The cdur analysis identifies a critical budget B∗beyond which calibration may improve
or worsen depending on the problem. In practice, B∗is unknown and problem-dependent.
A practical algorithm must decide on the fly when to stop allocating reasoning tokens.

7.2
Formulation as an Optimal Stopping Problem

Let (ˆat, ˆpt) denote the model’s answer and confidence after t reasoning tokens. Let ˆαt
be an auxiliary estimate of the correctness probability at step t (e.g., from a lightweight
verifier or from self-consistency across multiple samples). Define the calibration gap at
step t:
∆t = ˆpt −ˆαt.
(7)

CABStop is a stopping rule τ ∗defined as:

τ ∗= min{t : ∆t > δ},
(8)

where δ > 0 is a calibration tolerance threshold.

This is a first-passage stopping rule over the stochastic process (∆t)t≥0. The rule halts
reasoning when the model’s expressed confidence exceeds its estimated accuracy by more
than δ.

Proposition 6.1 (Optimality of CABStop under Monotone Confidence)

If ˆpt is non-decreasing and ˆαt is approximately constant past B∗, then τ ∗minimizes
expected ECE among all stopping rules of the form τ = inf{t : f(∆t) > c} for any
non-decreasing f.

Proof sketch. The ECE at stopping time τ satisfies

ECE(τ) ≈|ˆpτ −ˆατ| = |∆τ|.

Under the stated monotonicity assumptions, ∆t is non-decreasing, so the first time ∆t
crosses δ is also the time that minimizes the future expected ECE (since past τ ∗, ∆t ≥δ
and ECE only worsens). Among rules of the given form, the threshold rule with threshold
δ is optimal by the structure of first-passage times.

Algorithm 1 CABStop: Confidence-Accuracy Budget Stopping

Require: Question q, calibration threshold δ, check interval ∆B, max budget Bmax
Ensure: Answer ˆa, confidence ˆp, stopping budget τ ∗

1: t ←0, R ←ϵ (empty reasoning chain)
2: while t < Bmax do
3:
Generate ∆B more reasoning tokens: R ←R ∪Rt:t+∆B
4:
t ←t + ∆B
5:
Extract candidate answer ˆat and confidence ˆpt from (q, R)
6:
Compute auxiliary accuracy estimate ˆαt
▷e.g., self-consistency over k samples
7:
if ˆpt −ˆαt > δ then
8:
return ˆat, ˆpt, τ ∗= t
9:
end if
10: end while
11: return ˆaBmax, ˆpBmax, τ ∗= Bmax

7.3
Algorithm

7.4
TikZ: CABStop Mechanism

7.5
Discussion

Choice of δ.
In our experiments, OG > 0.10 consistently corresponds to what practi-
tioners would consider problematic overconfidence. We recommend δ = 0.10 as a starting
point, which aligns with the conventional ECE threshold for “well-calibrated” systems.
The appropriate δ is task- and deployment-dependent and should be tuned accordingly.

Auxiliary accuracy estimation.
The most straightforward implementation uses self-
consistency [Wang et al., 2022]: generate k independent continuations from the current
reasoning state and use the fraction agreeing with ˆat as ˆαt. With k = 5, this adds modest
compute overhead relative to the inference budget.

Failure cases of CABStop.
CABStop assumes ˆαt provides a meaningful signal about
correctness. This assumption fails in at least two important scenarios.

First, when the model is consistently wrong across samples: if all k self-consistency
samples agree on an incorrect answer, ˆαt will be high (reflecting consistency) even though
accuracy is zero. In this case, ∆t = ˆpt −ˆαt will be small and CABStop will not halt
early—precisely when it should. This failure mode is most likely on questions in the
high-frequency trap categories (counting, syllogism), where the model may have a strong
prior toward a specific wrong answer.

Second, when confidence is not monotone in t: the optimality guarantee of Proposition 6.1
requires ˆpt to be non-decreasing. In practice, verbalized confidence may fluctuate, especially
when the model partially reconsiders an intermediate step. In this case, the stopping rule
may trigger and release prematurely.

Practical recommendations.
Based on our empirical observations, we offer the
following guidance for practitioners choosing reasoning budgets for calibration-sensitive
applications.

For tasks requiring precise discrete computation (counting, set theory, modular arithmetic,
combinatorics), light reasoning budgets appear particularly risky: our results suggest they
increase confidence without commensurate accuracy gains. Either no reasoning (for speed)
or heavy reasoning (for accuracy) is preferable to a brief chain-of-thought that may lock
in a wrong answer.

For tasks requiring multi-step logical inference (syllogisms, conditionals), the risk of early
lock-in is high. Self-consistency checking—generating multiple independent chains and
comparing answers—is a low-cost intervention that can improve confidence calibration
without increasing single-chain budget.

Monitoring the OG metric (Conf −Acc) on a held-out calibration set, separately for
each reasoning budget, is recommended for any deployment where calibration matters. A
model showing OG > 0.20 at a given budget should be treated with caution, even if its
accuracy is acceptable.

8
Threats to Validity

We report the following threats transparently. Some of these are discussed in detail in
earlier sections; we consolidate them here for clarity.

Small sample size.
The dataset contains 47 trap questions, yielding approximately
8–10 valid responses per trap type per model per budget. This limits the statistical power
of all analyses, and particularly per-category analyses. ECE estimates are sensitive to
outliers at this sample size. Confidence intervals across seeds partially mitigate this, but
the standard deviations reported in Table 3 are large in several conditions, indicating that
results should be interpreted as directional rather than precise.

Validity filtering and selection bias.
As discussed in Section 5.3, the 42% validity
rate may introduce systematic bias.
If models are more likely to provide parseable
responses when confident, our ECE estimates will be biased toward overconfidence. The
direction of this bias is consistent with our main finding, meaning we cannot rule out the
possibility that the observed overconfidence is partly an artifact of selection.

Verbalized confidence limitations.
As discussed in Section 5.5, verbalized confidence
is not equivalent to model-internal epistemic uncertainty. Results should be interpreted
as measuring a behaviorally expressed property—verbalized confidence—rather than true
uncertainty.

Model family restriction.
We evaluate only models from the Llama-3 family. Whether
cdur manifests similarly in GPT-4o, Claude-3.5, Gemini, or other families is an open
empirical question. Based on our theoretical analysis, we expect the phenomenon to be
present in any model with RLHF-style training, but its severity may vary substantially.

Prompt sensitivity.
Budget levels are implemented via prompt engineering, which
may interact with model-specific instruction-following behavior. The specific wording of
budget prompts could affect both reasoning quality and confidence elicitation, and we
have not conducted ablations over prompt formulations.

Incomplete 70B data.
As discussed in Section 6.3, the absence of multi-budget data
for the 70B model means that scale-related conclusions are severely limited. We do not
draw conclusions about the scaling behavior of cdur.

9
Discussion

9.1
When CDUR Should Be Expected

The cdur phenomenon is not expected to manifest equally across all task types. Based
on our theoretical model and empirical results, calibration drift under reasoning is most
likely for tasks that share the following properties.

Discrete, exact-answer structure. Problems with a unique correct answer determined
by precise discrete computation (counting, modular arithmetic, combinatorics) leave little
room for the model to “almost be right.” A wrong initial hypothesis is simply wrong, and
reasoning that elaborates on it increases confidence without improving accuracy. Our
results confirm that these categories dominate the wrong-and-confident distribution.

Non-obvious traps. Problems where a plausible-seeming wrong answer exists (e.g.,
anchoring, spurious pattern completion, base-rate neglect) are particularly vulnerable,
because the initial hypothesis sampled by the model is likely to be the trap answer.
RLHF-trained models, which are rewarded for fluent and confident responses, may be
especially prone to sampling the most plausible-seeming hypothesis rather than the correct
one.

Short reasoning chains insufficient for correction. For problems requiring multiple
precise logical steps to reach the answer, short reasoning chains may correctly identify the
problem type but fail to execute all necessary steps, producing a confident partial answer.

Conversely, for open-ended generation tasks, subjective evaluation tasks, and tasks with
many acceptable answers, the lock-in mechanism is less relevant: there is no unique correct
h0, and confidence-accuracy alignment is harder to measure.

9.2
Implications for Inference-Time Scaling

Recent work proposes scaling inference-time compute as a complementary axis to training-
time compute [Snell et al., 2024]. Our findings suggest a nuance: inference-time scaling
improves accuracy but may worsen calibration at intermediate budget levels. A system
that scales compute without monitoring calibration may present confidently wrong answers
to users at the budget levels where the scaling is cheapest.

9.3
Implications for Model Evaluation

Standard benchmarks measure accuracy. Our results suggest that calibration should be
measured alongside accuracy, particularly as a function of reasoning budget. A model that
achieves high accuracy at heavy reasoning but poor ECE at light reasoning may perform
poorly in deployment scenarios where the full reasoning budget is not always available.

We recommend that future model evaluations report (Acc(B), ECE(B)) curves across
multiple budgets, not just peak accuracy.

9.4
Theoretical Limitations

The Hypothesis Lock-In Model (Section 4) is a stylized approximation. Real autoregressive
LLMs can revise their hypothesis mid-chain, especially when prompted with explicit
revision instructions. The propositions in Section 3 should be understood as characterizing
a specific mechanistic regime—where the model’s context is dominated by an early
committed hypothesis—rather than as universal laws governing all LLM reasoning.

The commitment model also does not account for the structured attention patterns of
Transformer architectures, temperature effects on hypothesis sampling, or the effect of
instruction-following fine-tuning on the probability of self-correction. A more precise
mechanistic account would require analysis at the level of attention weights and token
probabilities, which is left to future work.

9.5
Connections to Human Reasoning

The cdur phenomenon has a human cognition analog: post-hoc rationalization [Haidt,
2001]. Humans often form an initial intuitive judgment and then construct reasoning that
justifies it, increasing their confidence without increasing its accuracy. The commitment
model in Section 4 formalizes this structure in the LLM setting. The parallel suggests
that cdur may be a general feature of systems trained to produce justified conclusions
rather than accurate ones, extending beyond LLMs to any architecture with a generate-
then-justify structure.

10
Future Work

Empirical replication at scale.
The most pressing need is a larger dataset—at least
500 trap questions—to provide robust per-category calibration estimates and to verify the
non-monotone ECE trajectory with statistical significance.

Across model families.
Testing cdur on GPT-4o, Claude-3.5, and Gemini models
would determine whether the phenomenon is universal or Llama-specific. Completing the
70B evaluation across all budget conditions is a near-term priority.

Training interventions.
RLHF may be modified to reward calibrated confidence
rather than expressed confidence. Calibration-aware reward models—which penalize high
verbalized confidence on wrong answers—are a natural next step.

Better auxiliary estimators.
CABStop depends on the quality of ˆαt. Lightweight
verifier models, reward models, or retrieval-augmented consistency checks could improve
the accuracy estimate without substantial compute overhead, and would address the
consistent-wrong-answer failure case.

Adaptive budgeting.
A learned policy that maps (question, current calibration gap)
to (continue/stop) would be a stronger version of CABStop. This could be framed as
a reinforcement learning problem with a calibration-aware reward, and would avoid the
need for a hand-tuned threshold δ.

Formal lower bounds.
Can we prove a lower bound on the overconfidence gap under
the commitment model for specific problem classes? This would provide a theoretical
floor on achievable calibration and would clarify when no amount of budget tuning can
resolve the overconfidence problem.

Per-sample calibration analysis.
As discussed in Section 6.5, future work should
report per-sample confidence-accuracy distributions in addition to aggregate ECE, to
distinguish between uniform miscalibration and concentrated dangerous overconfidence.

11
Conclusion

We have introduced Calibration Drift Under Reasoning (cdur): the phenomenon
whereby increasing reasoning budget may first improve and then worsen model calibration,
producing non-monotone dynamics in the ECE(B) curve. We have provided:

(1) A formal definition of cdur and three propositions characterizing it under a probabilis-
tic Hypothesis Lock-In Model, establishing theoretical grounding for the phenomenon
under an explicit mechanistic abstraction.

(2) Empirical evidence from Llama-3.1-8B on 47 reasoning-trap questions spanning 21
cognitive failure modes, showing non-monotone ECE dynamics and persistent overcon-
fidence gaps exceeding 0.25 across all budget levels. We report limited Llama-3.3-70B
results (no-reasoning only) and explicitly acknowledge that cdur dynamics at this
scale remain unconfirmed.

(3) The CABStop algorithm—a calibration-aware stopping rule grounded in optimal
stopping theory—which halts reasoning when the confidence-accuracy gap exceeds a
threshold. We also characterize its failure cases and discuss practical guidance for
threshold selection.

We have been explicit about the methodological limitations of this study: the small
dataset, the 42% validity rate and its potential for selection bias, the imprecision of
verbalized confidence as an uncertainty signal, and the incomplete multi-scale evaluation.
These limitations do not negate the value of the theoretical framework or the empirical
observations for the 8B model, but they do call for the results to be treated as preliminary
evidence motivating further investigation rather than as settled empirical findings.

this non-monotonicity can be dangerous in practice. As inference-time scaling becomes a
mainstream technique, calibration monitoring—ideally combined with adaptive stopping
rules—deserves attention as a first-class concern alongside accuracy optimization.

References

Chow, Y. S., and Robbins, H. (1961). On optimal stopping rules. Zeitschrift für Wahrschein-
lichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 2(1):33–49.

De Groot, M. H. and Fienberg, S. E. (1983). The comparison and evaluation of forecasters.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), 32(1-2):12–22.

Desai, S. and Durrett, G. (2020). Calibration of pre-trained transformers. Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Graves, A. (2016). Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.08983.

Guo, C., Pleiss, G., Sun, Y., and Weinberger, K. Q. (2017). On calibration of modern
neural networks. Proceedings of ICML.

Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach
to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 108(4):814.

Kadavath, S., Conerly, T., Askell, A., Henighan, T., Drain, D., Perez, E., Schiefer, N.,
Hatfield-Dodds, Z., DasSarma, N., Tran-Johnson, T., et al. (2022). Language models
(mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221.

Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., and Iwasawa, Y. (2022). Large language
models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35.

Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J.,
Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., and Cobbe, K. (2023). Let’s verify step by step. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.20050.

Muennighoff, N., et al. (2025). Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more
effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314.

Murphy, A. H. (1977). The value of climatological, categorical and probabilistic forecasts
in the cost-loss ratio situation. Monthly Weather Review, 105(7):803–816.

Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C.,
Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A., et al. (2022). Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35.

Snell, C., Lee, J., Xu, K., and Kumar, A. (2024). Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally
can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314.

Turpin, M., Michael, J., Perez, E., and Bowman, S. R. (2023). Language models don’t
always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04388.

Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q., Chi, E., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou,
D. (2022). Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171.

Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., and
Zhou, D. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35.

Xiong, M., Hu, Z., Lu, X., Li, Y., Fu, J., He, J., and Hooi, B. (2024). Can LLMs express
their uncertainty? An empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in LLMs. Proceedings
of ICLR.

Zhou, W., Sha, Z., Zhang, Q., Gong, W., Shan, B., Yang, L., He, X., and Liu, B. (2023).
Navigating the grey area: How expressions of uncertainty and overconfidence affect
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13439.

A
Proof Details

A.1
Formal Consistency Score

We define the consistency score C used in Proposition 3.4 as follows. Let T be the
vocabulary and Vh0 ⊂T be the set of tokens that reinforce hypothesis h0 (e.g., tokens
that share lexical content with h0 or that appear in reasoning chains that conclude with
h0, as measured by a reference corpus). Then:

t
X

C(R1, . . . , Rt; h0) = 1

i=1
1[Ri ∈Vh0].

t

This is a running fraction, and E[C] = P[Ri ∈Vh0 | h0] =: ρ(h0) ∈(0, 1) by assumption.

Under the commitment model, P[Ri ∈Vh0 | h0, R1, . . . , Ri−1] is non-decreasing in i (since
the context increasingly supports h0), so C is a submartingale with positive drift for all
t ≥1. Hence E[C(R1, . . . , Rt; h0)] is non-decreasing in t.

A.2
Discussion of Assumption Robustness

The key assumption is that Pθ(Ri ∈Vh0 | h0, R<i) is non-decreasing in i. This holds under
self-attention architectures when:

1. h0 appears in the first few tokens of the reasoning chain and thus in the attention
window.

2. The model has been trained to produce coherent, self-consistent outputs (as encour-
aged by RLHF).

Both conditions hold approximately for current instruction-tuned LLMs. We do not claim
they hold universally, and the assumption may be violated when the model encounters
strong contradictory evidence mid-chain or when explicit revision instructions are provided.

B
Dataset: Trap Question Examples

Counting (highest frequency).
Question: “A frog climbs 3 meters up a 10-meter
wall each day and slides back 2 meters each night. How many days to reach the top?”
Expected: 8. Common wrong answer: 10. Trap: On day 8, the frog reaches 10m during
the day before sliding back; students often compute 10/1 = 10 naively.

Set theory.
Question: “In a class of 30, 18 play football, 15 play cricket, and 5
play both. How many play neither?” Expected: 2. Common wrong answer: 3. Trap:
Inclusion-exclusion requires |F ∪C| = 18 + 15 −5 = 28; neither = 30 −28 = 2.

Syllogism.
Question: “All A are B. All B are C. Is it true that all C are A?” Expected:
No. Common wrong answer: Yes. Trap: The converse of a universal statement does not
follow.

Probability.
Question: “A box has 2 red and 2 blue balls.
You draw 2 without
replacement. What is the probability both are red?” Expected: 1/6. Common wrong
answer: 1/4. Trap: The draws are dependent; P = 2

4 · 1

3 = 1

6.

C
Experimental Logs (Summary)

Table 3 reproduces the full summary statistics from the experimental runs. Standard
deviations are computed across 3 seeds; the 70B model was not evaluated at multi-budget
conditions, and those entries are absent.

Wrong + Confident (ˆp ≥0.90), by Trap Category

counting
27

set theory
18

spatial
18

semantic
13

compound
11

operator prec.
10

relative motion
9

probability
9

syllogism
7

anchor
6

algebra
5

modular
4

percentage
4

mixture
3

combinatorics
3

pattern
2

exponential
2

contrapositive
1

Count
0
5
10
15
20
25
threshold

Figure 1: Hypothesis Lock-In. The initial hypothesis h0 commits the reasoning trajectory.
Correct initialization leads to self-reinforcing correct chains; incorrect initialization leads
to self-reinforcing incorrect chains. In both cases, confidence ˆp tends to rise with chain
length.

Table 1: Reasoning-trap categories used in the evaluation dataset. Categories are ordered
by observed wrong + confident frequency (see Figure 3).

Rank
Category
Description

1
counting
Off-by-one and boundary errors in discrete
counting
2
set_theory
Confusion between union, intersection, and
complement
3
spatial
Failures in 3D spatial reasoning and perspec-
tive
4
semantic
Lexical ambiguity and scope confusion
5
compound
Multi-step errors compounding across a chain
6
operator_precedence
Misapplication of mathematical order of op-
erations
7
relative_motion
Incorrect frame-of-reference reasoning
8
probability
Base-rate neglect and conditional probability
errors
9
syllogism
Invalid syllogistic inference (affirming the con-
sequent, etc.)
10
anchor
Anchoring to salient but irrelevant numerical
values
11
conditional_prob
Confusion of P(A|B) with P(B|A)
12
algebra
Sign errors and variable substitution mistakes
13
modular
Errors in modular arithmetic (e.g., day-of-
week calculations)
14
percentage
Percentage-of-percentage and base confusion
15
mixture
Weighted average and mixture problem errors
16
combinatorics
Permutation/combination
and
double-
counting errors
17
pattern
Spurious pattern extrapolation
18
exponential
Misestimation of exponential vs. linear growth
19
contrapositive
Failure to correctly negate and reverse condi-
tionals
20
modular (misc.)
Additional modular reasoning items
21
(other)
Miscellaneous cross-category items

ECE(B)

CALIBRATION
IMPROVES

OVERCONFIDENCE
REGIME

0.10

Calibration Sweet Spot

ECE∗

Reasoning Budget B

0

none
light
heavy

B∗

Figure 2: Schematic of the cdur phenomenon. ECE(B) is U-shaped in the reasoning
budget B under the theoretical model. The green region (B < B∗) is the beneficial
reasoning regime; the orange region (B > B∗) is the overconfidence regime. Empirical
results for 8B are qualitatively consistent with non-monotone dynamics, but do not
perfectly match this schematic (see Section 6.2).

Table 2: Selected “smoking gun” examples: incorrect responses with verbalized confidence
≥0.90. All are from Llama-3.1-8B, no-reasoning condition.

Model
Budget
Trap Type
Expected
Predicted
Conf.

8B
none
anchor
5
10
1.0
8B
none
compound
629
567
1.0
8B
none
syllogism
no
yes
1.0
8B
none
counting
10
7
1.0
8B
none
probability
1/4
1/8
1.0
8B
none
op_prec.
16
4
1.0
8B
none
set_theory
30
50
1.0
8B
none
spatial
512
27
1.0
8B
none
algebra
20
14
1.0
8B
none
modular
friday
Saturday
1.0
8B
light
syllogism
no
yes
1.0

Wrong + Confident (ˆp ≥0.90), by Trap Category

counting
27

set theory
18

spatial
18

semantic
13

compound
11

operator prec.
10

relative motion
9

probability
9

syllogism
7

anchor
6

algebra
5

modular
4

percentage
4

mixture
3

combinatorics
3

pattern
2

exponential
2

contrapositive
1

Count
0
5
10
15
20
25
threshold

Figure 3: Distribution of wrong-and-confident responses (ˆp ≥0.90) by trap category,
aggregated across both models, all budgets, and all seeds. Categories requiring precise
discrete computation or strict logical reasoning dominate.

Input q
start reasoning

Elicit ˆat, ˆpt
Estimate ˆαt
ˆpt −ˆαt > δ?

Generate
∆B tokens

no

yes
no

Continue
reasoning
t ≥Bmax?

Stop.
Return ˆat, ˆpt

yes

Force stop.
Return answer.

Figure 4: CABStop control flow. At each reasoning checkpoint, the algorithm compares
the model’s expressed confidence ˆpt with an auxiliary accuracy estimate ˆαt. Reasoning
halts when their gap exceeds the calibration threshold δ.

Table 3: Full results: ECE (mean ± std across 3 seeds), overconfidence gap, and accuracy
for trap questions. The large standard deviation at 8B medium budget reflects high
seed-to-seed variability and should be interpreted cautiously. 70B results are available
only at the no-reasoning condition.

Model
Budget
ECE ± std
OG (conf−acc)
Accuracy

Llama-3.1-8B
none
0.0436 ± 0.0154
+0.493
0.461
Llama-3.1-8B
light
0.1040 ± 0.0339
+0.249
0.732
Llama-3.1-8B
medium
0.0496 ± 0.0492
+0.336
0.653
Llama-3.1-8B
heavy
0.0145 ± 0.0049
+0.245
0.739

Llama-3.3-70B
none
0.0352 ± 0.0264
+0.155
0.825
Llama-3.3-70B
light
not evaluated
Llama-3.3-70B
medium
not evaluated
Llama-3.3-70B
heavy
not evaluated